Addison's disease
Also known as Chronic adrenocortical insufficiency, Primary adrenal insufficiency, Primary failure adrenocortical insufficiency
Overview
Addison's disease is a rare disorder characterized by inadequate production of the steroid hormones cortisol and aldosterone by the adrenal gland. Adrenal glands are located on top of your kidneys and produce many hormones for the normal functioning of the body.

Symptoms generally come on slowly and may include abdominal pain, muscle weakness, and weight loss. Darkening of the skin in certain areas may also be seen.

Addison's disease mostly affects middle-aged females. Risk factors include certain medications, sepsis, and bleeding into both adrenal glands.

Treatment involves replacing the absent hormones. The prescribed medications are usually taken lifelong, and regular follow-up treatment and monitoring for other health problems are also required.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults between 30- 50 years of age.
Gender affected
Both men and women, but more common in women.
Body part(s) involved
Adrenal glands
Skin
Prevalence
World: 4 to 11 per 1,00,000 of the population (2022)
India: 1 in 1,00,000 people (2021)
Mimicking Conditions
Adrenal crisis
Adrenal hemorrhage
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Eosinophilia
Histoplasmosis
Hyperkalemia
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Necessary health tests/imaging
1. Laboratory tests: Serum cortisol, ACTH stimulation test, Serum renin, and aldosterone levels, Serum electrolytes, Random blood glucose test. Serum calcium, and TSH.
2. Imaging tests: Abdominal computed tomography (CT), Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and Chest radiograph.

3. Additional tests: PPD test, Plasma's very long-chain fatty acid profile, and Electrocardiography (ECG).
Treatment
Hormone replacement therapy
Glucocorticoid replacement: Hydrocortisone, Prednisone, and Dexamethasone.
Mineralocorticoid replacement: Fludrocortisone.
Androgen replacement: Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA).
See All
Symptoms Of Addison's Disease

Addison’s disease is a hormonal disorder with an array of symptoms. These include:

Tiredness and fatigue
Loss of appetite
Craving for salt
Nausea, vomiting
Abdominal pain
Dizziness
Pain in the muscles
Diarrhea
Loss of consciousness
Constipation
Increased pigmentation
Loss of weight
Hypotension (low BP)
Anemia
Vitiligo (a disease that causes loss of skin color in patches)

Note: Sometimes the symptoms of Addison's disease appear suddenly. This is known as the Addisonian crisis. It is a life-threatening situation that results in low blood pressure, low blood levels of sugar, and high blood levels of potassium. 
Causes Of Addison's Disease

Addison's disease is caused by damage to the adrenal glands that sit just above the kidneys resulting in adrenal insufficiency. Causes of adrenal insufficiency based on the type includes:
Primary adrenal insufficiency
It occurs when the adrenal glands are damaged and don’t make enough of the hormones cortisol and aldosterone. The major causes of primary adrenal insufficiency include:
Autoimmune disorders: These are conditions in which your immune system attacks your adrenal glands. These include:
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (an inherited condition affecting major organs)
Candidiasis
Ectodermal dysplasia ( a genetic disorder affecting the development of the teeth, hair, nails, and sweat glands)
Autoimmune thyroiditis 
Type 1 diabetes 
Pernicious anemia
Vitiligo or alopecia

Infections: These can cause an adrenal crisis due to decreased cortisol leading to severe complications. Infections that can cause primary adrenal insufficiency include:
Sepsis
Tuberculosis
HIV
Cytomegalovirus infections
Fungal infections
Syphilis

Adrenal hemorrhage: Bilateral adrenal hemorrhages can be due to DIC (Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation, a serious disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become overactive), trauma, meningococcemia (infection in the bloodstream). 

Note: An Adrenal crisis due to meningococcemia is known as the Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome and is more common in children and patients without a spleen.

Infiltration: This can be due to cancer and abnormal growths (tumors) that can cause primary adrenal insufficiency.

Drugs: Certain drugs can cause adrenal insufficiency by blocking cortisol synthesis. They include:

Blood thinners
Glucocorticoids
Antifungal agents
Secondary adrenal insufficiency
This starts when the pituitary gland doesn’t make enough of the hormone ACTH (adrenocorticotropin) resulting in decreased cortisol levels. Causes of secondary adrenal insufficiency include:
Tumors
Medications like corticosteroids
Family history
Trauma or injury to the brain

Understand how hormonal imbalance can throw you off balance and ways to manage it. Watch this video now

Risk Factors For Addison's Disease

Adrenal insufficiency causes Addison’s disease. There are certain factors that can increase your chances of developing this insufficiency. They include:
1. Type I diabetes
The risk of developing Addison’s disease is higher in those suffering from type 1 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes also known as juvenile diabetes is a chronic condition in which the pancreas produces little or no insulin.

Note: Type I Diabetes is called Juvenile diabetes because it affects the younger population. It is an autoimmune condition causing the destruction of the cells of the pancreas.
Know more about Type 1 diabetes
Tap Here
2. Hypoparathyroidism
It is a condition in which the parathyroid glands don't produce enough parathyroid hormone. Though a rare disorder, affected individuals have been associated with Addison's disease.
3. Hypopituitarism
Your pituitary gland is a small, pea-sized gland located at the base of your brain. It produces and releases several hormones that help carry out important bodily functions. Hypopituitarism leads to a deficiency of one or more of the pituitary hormones and can lead to adrenal insufficiencies.
4. Pernicious anemia
Pernicious anemia is caused by Vitamin B12 deficiency and is associated with primary adrenal insufficiency.
5. Testicular dysfunction
It is a condition in which the testicles cannot produce enough sperm or male hormones, such as testosterone. This can be caused by autoimmunity, which in turn increases the chances of getting Addison’s disease.
6. Grave’s disease
It is an immune system disorder that results in the overproduction of thyroid hormones (hyperthyroidism). Grave’s disease and Addison's disease are linked with a strong auto-immune basis.
Note: Individuals with Graves' disease and Addison's simultaneously are at risk of incipient adrenal crisis.
7. Chronic thyroiditis
It is a condition that causes swelling of the thyroid gland. It often results in reduced thyroid function, thus increasing the risk for the development of Addison’s disease.
8. Dermatitis herpetiformis
Commonly known as celiac disease, this is a chronic condition with intense itching, and blisters all over the skin. Individuals with this disorder are at a higher risk of developing Addison’s disease and other autoimmune conditions.
9. Vitiligo
Sporadic vitiligo is associated with autoimmune thyroid disease, pernicious anemia, Addison's disease, and lupus.

Wondering what exactly is vitiligo?
Read about these 4 facts about vitiligo that can help you understand this condition better.
Click Here
10. Myasthenia gravis
It is an autoimmune disorder in which antibodies destroy the communication between nerves and muscles, resulting in weakness of the skeletal muscles. This condition is rarely associated with Addison’s disease.
11. Medications 
Certain drugs like Ketoconazole and Etomidate can cause adrenal insufficiency by blocking cortisol synthesis. 
12. Other risk factors
Sarcoidosis: It is characterized by the growth of tiny collections of inflammatory cells, (known as granulomas) in the body.
Lymphoma: Cancer of the lymphatic system that includes lymph nodes, spleen, thymus gland, and bone marrow.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: A group of genetic disorders affecting the adrenal gland.
Adrenoleukodystrophy: It is a type of genetic condition that damages the membrane protecting the nerve cells in the brain.
Diagnosis Of Addison's Disease

Diagnosing Addison’s disease can be very crucial in deciding the treatment. The diagnosis must include detailed history along with a physical examination to evaluate the signs and symptoms. 
Apart from this, the diagnosis is established by the following:
1. Laboratory tests
These consist of blood tests to check for any imbalance in the hormonal levels. Tests include:

Serum cortisol: A low cortisol level (< 3 mcg/dL) confirms the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
ACTH stimulation test: This test measures how well the adrenal glands respond to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The ACTH level is markedly elevated in primary adrenal insufficiency.
Serum renin and aldosterone levels: This test is done to determine whether a mineralocorticoid deficiency is present.
Anti–21-hydroxylase antibodies: These serve as the markers of autoimmune destruction of the adrenal gland. 
Other tests: 
Serum electrolytes
Random blood glucose test
Serum calcium
TSH (Thyroid stimulating hormone ) test
Complete blood count (CBC)

Imaging tests
These tests are done to have a better look at the adrenal gland. These include:

Abdominal computed tomography (CT): It is done in a suspected case of adrenal hemorrhage.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): MRI of the hypothalamic-pituitary region should be obtained if ACTH is inappropriately low in the presence of cortisol deficiency. 
Chest radiograph: This test may be useful to diagnose tuberculosis associated with Addison’s disease

Additional tests
PPD test: This is a skin test that should be performed to evaluate for tuberculosis. 
Plasma's very long-chain fatty acid profile: This test is done in cases where damage to the nerves is suspected.
Electrocardiography (ECG): ECG is done to check for hyperkalemia (increased potassium levels) caused by aldosterone hormone deficiency in Addison’s disease.
Histology: It is useful to investigate infiltrative causes of adrenal insufficiency.

Get your tests done in the comfort of your home.
Book Your Test Now

Prevention Of Addison's Disease

There is no way to prevent Addison’s disease, but the condition can be well-managed to prevent the Addisonian crisis. Certain useful tips include:
Talk to your doctor if are always tired or are losing weight without even trying
Understand what is an adrenal shortage
Know what to do when you're sick or in case of an emergency
Get enough sleep

Finding it difficult to fall asleep easily?
Buy sleep aid products that can help you get quality sleep.
Browse Now


Have optimum salt intake in your diet 
Try to have a healthy lifestyle
Exercise regularly

Too lazy to sweat?
Try these tips and tricks that can help you get that daily dose of exercise.
Read Now


Eat a well-balanced nutritious diet

Know more about healthy eating habits and how to get complete nutrition from your diet. Watch Now


Avoid red meat, foods with preservatives, aerated drinks, and sugar
Drink alcohol in moderation
Quit smoking.

Want to quit smoking?
Try our widest range of smoking cessation products to help you achieve this goal.
Explore Now


Specialist To Visit

Doctors that can help diagnose and curate an appropriate treatment plan for the management of Addison’s disease include:
General physician
Endocrinologist

An endocrinologist is a doctor who treats conditions of the endocrine glands.

When to see a doctor?
Seek emergency treatment if you notice the following:
Extreme weakness
Intense pain
Unstable or changes in the heart rate or blood pressure
Temperature higher than 101 F
Persistent hypotension (low BP)

Noticing any of the above symptoms?
Well, do not delay and get the right diagnosis and treatment from our team of qualified doctors.
Book Your Appointment Now


Treatment Of Addison's Disease

Timely treatment of Addison’s disease is very crucial, as negligence can lead to an Addisonian crisis that can be life-threatening. The treatment mainly consists of hormone replacement therapy that corrects the levels of steroid hormones. It includes:

1. Hormone replacement therapy
Glucocorticoid replacement: The medications commonly used are:
Hydrocortisone
Prednisone 
Dexamethasone
 During this regime, clinical symptoms and plasma ACTH are monitored as required. 
Mineralocorticoid replacement: Fludrocortisone is the most commonly used drug during this regime. During this treatment, it is important to monitor blood pressure as well as pulse, edema, and serum potassium levels
Androgen replacement: Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is usually the drug of choice. This therapy is given only in women for psychological well-being, if needed, after optimal glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement

Ordering medicines has never been easier!
Get your medications online from India’s largest online pharmacy.
Click Here
2. Management of adrenal crisis
This is a life-threatening condition that needs immediate treatment. The management consists of the following:
Intravenous (IV) infusion of isotonic saline or 5% dextrose as early as possible
Analysis of serum electrolytes, glucose, and routine measurement of plasma cortisol and ACTH.
IV Hydrocortisone and due correction of any ongoing electrolyte abnormalities
3. Treatment during pregnancy
Pregnant patients with primary adrenal insufficiency should be monitored for clinical symptoms and signs of glucocorticoid over- and under-replacement (normal weight
gain, fatigue, low or high BP, increased blood sugar) with at least one review per trimester. The drugs used are:
Hydrocortisone
Prednisolone
Dexamethasone
4. Treatment during childhood
In children with primary adrenal insufficiency, treatment with hydrocortisone in three or four divided doses is recommended. Fludrocortisone is recommended in children with primary adrenal insufficiency along with aldosterone (a hormone that helps regulate your blood pressure) deficiency.
Home care For Addison's Disease

Addison’s disease requires lifelong hormone replacement therapy. Along with medications there are certain home care tips that can help manage your condition better. These include:
1. Eating a supportive diet
Some people with Addison’s disease may have low aldosterone levels leading to low sodium and high amounts of potassium. Eating a diet that can balance out this can be very beneficial.

Foods to eat
Grain products
Eggs
Cheese
Milk
Yogurt
Broccoli
Tofu
Fortified cereal
Chicken
Tuna
Canned beans

Foods to avoid
Coffee
Green tea
Black tea
Excessive alcohol
Too many bananas and oranges
Salt substitutes
2. Adding that extra salt
Individuals with Addison’s disease tend to crave salt due to low aldosterone levels, The best choice of sodium-rich foods is foods like eggs, cheese, salted nuts and seeds, and poultry. 
3. Managing stress
Stress can hamper the treatment of Addison’s disease by decreasing glucocorticosteroid secretions. Make time to relax, every day and practice slow, deep breathing to manage your stress levels. 

Are you looking for ways to de-stress yourself?
Learn about effective techniques to manage stress.
Tap Here


4. Giving importance to supplements
People who take medicines to replace cortisol may also need plenty of calcium and vitamin D. Taking supplements like adaptogens and certain vitamins can be very useful. Consult your doctor or dietitian before starting these supplements.

Check out our extensive range of vitamins and supplements to meet all your needs.
Fill Your Carts Now
Complications Of Addison's Disease

The major complication of Addison’s disease is acute adrenal insufficiency or Addisonian crisis. This generally occurs when your body is stressed mainly due to an illness, fever, surgery, or dehydration. If an Addisonian crisis is not treated, it can lead to the following complications:

Shock
Seizures
Severe abdominal pain
Extreme weakness
Low blood pressure
Kidney failure
Coma

Did you know?
COVID-19 infection can cause adrenal hemorrhage leading to primary and secondary adrenal insufficiencies.
Read More About Covid-19 Here
Alternative Therapies For Addison's Disease

Certain alternative therapies have shown good results in managing Addison's disease along with conventional treatment. These include:
Naturotherapy
This is a method to treat illnesses or conditions using natural foods, massages, and other techniques instead of artificial medications. The most commonly used herb is Ashwagandha, which helps to restore optimal health by maintaining energy levels and immunity function. 
Salt substitution therapy
Salt substitutes replace part of the sodium chloride in regular salt with potassium chloride. This therapy can maintain the expected level of sodium chloride and other elements found to be deficient in these individuals.
Regenerative therapy
This therapy is beneficial for Addison’s disease as it uses the application of stem cells. Stem cells are cells from which all other cells with specialized functions are generated. They have the potential to repair and restore function in damaged body tissues or organs. 
Living With Addison's Disease

Diagnosis of Addison’s disease may come as a shock and the fact that it requires lifelong treatment can be overwhelming. But, this condition can be well managed and individuals with this disorder can live their life to the fullest. However, there are certain things to remember if you have Addioson’s disease. These include:
1. Understand your condition
Knowing everything about your illness can be very beneficial, especially in managing an emergency situation.
Also, managing stress and learning to inject your medications can help you be independent.
2. Have a medical alert bracelet/necklace
It is an emergency medical information card on your phone or inside your wallet, and prefilled syringes containing 4 mg of dexamethasone in 1 mL saline. An emergency card and medical alert identification helps emergency care providers know what kind of care you might need. 
3. Keep extra medicines handy
Missing out on even a single dose can be dangerous, so always keep your medications stocked up. Also, have a small supply at work and with you when you travel. 
4. Get yearly checkups
See your doctor at least once a year. Your doctor may recommend yearly screening for autoimmune diseases, and monitoring your hormone levels. If you have problems with your medication, your provider might need to change the doses or time.

Stay alert!
Learn more about step-by-step guidelines to prepare for any medical emergencies.
Enlighten Yourself Now

Frequently Asked Questions
How does Addison's disease affect daily routine?
What is the outlook for Addison’s disease?
Is there a cure for Addison’s disease?
Are Addison's disease and Cushing's syndrome different?
Is Addison's disease fatal?
References
Synonyms. Addiso’s Disease. Rare Disease Database. January 17, 2018.
Munir S, Quintanilla Rodriguez BS, Waseem M. Addison Disease. [Updated 2022 Aug 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-.
Lee HW, Kang JD, Yeo CW, Yoon SW, Lee KJ, Choi MK. Hypopituitarism Presenting as Adrenal Insufficiency and Hypothyroidism in a Patient with Wilson's Disease: a Case Report. J Korean Med Sci. 2016 Aug;31(8):1345-8.
Mirza HA, Gharbi A, Bhutta BS. Dermatitis Herpetiformis. [Updated 2022 Aug 9]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-.
Laberge G, Mailloux CM, Gowan K, et al. Early disease onset and increased risk of other autoimmune diseases in familial generalized vitiligo. Pigment Cell Res. 2005;18(4):300-305.
Huecker MR, Bhutta BS, Dominique E. Adrenal Insufficiency. [Updated 2022 Oct 31]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-.
Stefan R et al. Diagnosis and Treatment of Primary Adrenal Insufficiency: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, February 2016, 101(2):364 –389.
Hashim M, Athar S, Gaba WHNew onset adrenal insufficiency in a patient with COVID-19BMJ Case Reports CP 2021;14:e237690.
Adrenal Insufficiency & Addison’s Disease. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disorders.
Adrenal Insufficiency (Addison's Disease). Johns Hopkins Medicine..
Gan H et al. Regenerative therapies in autoimmune Addison’s disease. European Journal of Endocrinology. (2017) 176, R123–R135.
Ntege EH, Sunami H, Shimizu Y. Advances in regenerative therapy: A review of the literature and future directions. Regen Ther. 2020 Feb 20;14:136-153.
Anderson HH, Reed AC. Salt Substitution Therapy in Addison's Disease. Cal West Med. 1934 Jul;41(1):57.
Addison’s Disease. Organization for Rare Diseases India. Jun 2021.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.