Choking
Also known as Strangle, and Clogged up
Overview
Choking happens when an object or a liquid blocks the throat or windpipe blocking the flow of air. The symptoms of choking are coughing, inability to talk, difficulty breathing and turning blue (cyanosis). 
  Children often choke as a result of placing foreign objects into their mouths. Adults can choke from eating or drinking too rapidly or when laughing while eating or drinking.
  If someone is choking, the best way to give that person first aid is by encouraging them to cough, bend the person forward and give up backflow to dislodge the blockage. If the person is still choking, give abdominal thrusts by holding it around the waist and pressing the belly inward and outward. 
  Choking can be prevented by following various preventive measures like cutting food into smaller pieces, chewing food slowly and thoroughly, and avoiding laughing and talking while chewing and swallowing. 
Causes Of Choking 

Most episodes of choking are simply due to some mistakes while eating. The various causes of choking are discussed below:

1. Mechanical 
Choking is the result of mechanical obstruction of the airways preventing normal breathing can be due to eating food too quickly, laughing while eating, or consuming a large chunk of food.
2. Neurological 
Swallowing is a complex interplay of signals from the brain to the muscles of the mouth and throat. Disorders related to the brain and nerves can create an imbalance in this mechanism and lead to choking. 
3. Allergic 
A few allergic reactions can cause swelling at the back of the mouth that can block airflow and cause a choking sensation.
4. Musculoskeletal
Weakening of the muscles of the mouth or throat can make swallowing less effective and can lead to choking.
5. Other causes of choking 
Stroke 
Head injury 
Dementia 
Multiple sclerosis 
Symptoms Of Choking 

The signs and symptoms of choking vary according to the severity of the obstruction. These include

Difficulty in breathing 
Difficulty in speaking 
Neck or throat pain
Coughing 
Dizziness 
A red puffy face 
Bluish tint to the lips, skin, or nails due to lack of oxygen 
Look of shock or confusion 
Strained or noisy breathing
Squeaky sounds while breathing 
Types Of Choking 

Choking can be classified into two types:

Partial airway obstruction or mild choking
In partial airway obstruction, the patient may be able to breathe and cough, although there may be a 'crowing' noise coming as the air passes through a narrowed space. In this case, the person could clear the blockage by coughing. 
Complete airway obstruction or severe choking 
In the case of severe choking, the person won't be able to speak, cry, cough, or breathe, and without help, they'll eventually become unconscious.
Risk Factors For Choking 

1. Inattention while eating 
If a person is laughing, not chewing the food properly, or distracted by other people's activities then it can easily increase the risk of choking. 
2. Swallowing inedible objects 
Swallowing inedible objects can sometimes pass through your system without notice. In some cases, the objects can get stuck in the food pipe that connects the mouth and stomach or can block the airway causing choking.
3. Dysphagia (difficulty swallowing)
In the case of dysphagia,  there's a risk of food, drink, or saliva going down the wrong way. Ultimately this can block the airway, making it difficult to breathe and causing a person to cough or choke.
4. Neurological and muscular disorders 
Neurological disorders like cerebral palsy and seizure disorder increase the chances of choking. Any damage to the nervous system can interfere with the nerves responsible for controlling swallowing. 
5. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
GERD is a condition in which acid-containing contents in the stomach persistently leak back up into the esophagus (the tube from the throat to the stomach). In some cases of GERD, a person may experience pain in the chest or trouble swallowing. A feeling of food stuck or tightness in the throat might be experienced.
6. Dentures 
Dentures can make it difficult to sense whether food is fully chewed before it is swallowed. If dentures are poorly fit, individuals are unable to chew their food properly which can lead to choking. 
Diagnosis Of Choking 

A medical practitioner will carry out an initial assessment of swallowing to assess the reasons for choking. They may refer for further tests and treatments.

1. History 
A medical practitioner will assess the history of the swallowing difficulties by determining the ability to swallow solids, liquids, or both and ask about the symptoms the individual is facing. 

2. Lab tests 
Swallow tests: These tests can be helpful in the initial assessment of swallowing abilities. The doctor will tell the [patient to swallow water and the time taken to drink water and the number of swallows required will be recorded.
Manometry and 24-hour pH study: This test helps in evaluating the functioning of the esophagus. A small tube with pressure sensors is passed through the nose into the esophagus to measure the amount of acid that flows back from the stomach. This can help in determining the cause of choking difficulties.

Booking your lab tests just got easier. Get all the tests done in the comfort and safety of your home.
Find all the tests here


3. Imaging tests 
Barium X-ray: In this test the patient is told to drink a barium solution that coats the esophagus, making it easier to visualize on X-rays. This test helps in visualizing the changes in the shape of your esophagus. The results are recorded, allowing the choking problems to be studied in detail.

Endoscopy: In this test, a thin, flexible lighted instrument (endoscope) is passed down the throat so that the doctor can visualize the esophagus.

Fiber-optic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES): This test is usually a first choice for studying swallowing disorders as it is easy to use and well tolerated with no radiation exposure. First, an endoscope (a thin and flexible tube with a light and a camera at one end)is used to look down and identify any blockages in the nose and upper airways. Second, swallowing is assessed with different textures and sizes of food and liquid.

Videofluoroscopic Swallow Study (VFSS): This test, also known as a modified barium swallow, is another gold standard that allows dynamic x-ray examination of the oral cavity, pharynx, and esophagus. It permits evaluation of the patient’s airway before, during, and after swallowing.

Computed Tomography (CT scan): This procedure uses a computer linked to an x-ray machine to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A neck CT scan uses a special X-ray machine to make images of the soft tissues and organs of the neck, including the muscles, throat, tonsils, airways, thyroid, and other glands.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan: The procedure uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to produce detailed images of the inside of the body. A neck MRI scan makes images of the soft tissues and organs of the neck, including the muscles, throat, tonsils, airways, thyroid, and other glands.
Prevention Of Choking 

Prevention of choking in adults:
Cut or chop food into smaller pieces.
Chew food slowly.
Avoid laughing and talking while eating. 
Avoid intake of alcohol before and after meals. 
If you wear dentures, take extra care to chew the food slowly and properly.

Prevention of choking in children:
Children under 4 years of age are at higher risk of choking, but older children can also choke. Children with disabilities or with some chronic illness might also be at higher risk of choking than other children.

1. Avoidance of food choking hazards 
Children under four years of age are at higher risk of choking on food because they do not have the back teeth that are required for grinding hard food down to small pieces. They are easily distracted while eating and have small airways that can easily block. Foods that are needed to be avoided if your child is under 4 years of age: 

Hard fruits and vegetables like raw carrot
Small and round fruits and vegetables like whole cherry tomatoes, whole grapes, berries
Smooth and sticky foods like peanut butter or some sticky spreads
Pieces and bones of meat, chicken, and fish
Round and cylindrical foods like hot dogs and sausages
Whole nuts and seeds 
Hard-to-chew foods like hard cookies, chips, candies, and popcorn

2. Make food safer to eat 

Peel the skin and remove the seeds of the fruits. Grate hard fruits and vegetables such as raw carrots and apples or cook to soften and cut into smaller pieces.
In the case of meat, serve tender, moist meat that is cut into smaller pieces. Remove all bones from the meat before serving.
Give them finely chopped or crushed nuts and seeds until they are four years old. 

3. Watch the child while eating and drinking 

Seat your child comfortably in a chair while eating and drinking
Do not let the child eat while walking, running, lying down, or while in a moving car as this reduces the risk of choking
Keep the mealtime calm with minimal distractions and encourage the child to chew properly
Avoid giving the baby a milk bottle in bed. As soon as the babies fall asleep with a bottle in their mouth, this can draw liquid into their lungs and choking can occur.

4. Avoidance of non-food choking hazards 
Toddlers and young children explore the world by putting anything and everything in their mouths. Keep the children out of reach of a few things to create a safer environment.

Keep small and round-shaped objects out of reach of children including buttons, bottle caps, coins, jewelry, small magnets, and marbles
Check for broken pieces of toys or games around the space where the child is playing.
Follow age recommendations on toy packages
Teach children not to put small objects in their mouths during their playtime
Encourage kids not to put pencils, crayons, or erasers in their mouths when coloring or drawing.
Make your home a “Childproof home” by getting down on your hands and knees in every room of your home for a kid's-eye view. 
Remove or lock away items that could be dangerous.
 Did you know?
Latex balloons can be a choking hazard for toddlers and young children. If a child chews on a deflated balloon and then suddenly breathes in, a broken latex balloon can fill up a child’s airway and form an airtight seal. This can make rescue efforts very hard. Choose mylar or foil balloons instead. 
Specialist To Visit
  Choking can be caused due to several reasons. In case of frequent choking, doctors can help you diagnose the exact cause and provide treatment including

General physicians
Neurologists 
Gastroenterologists 
Pediatrician (in the case of children)

A neurologist is a specialist in conditions that affect the brain, nerves, and spinal cord
A gastroenterologist is a specialist who is a medical practitioner qualified to diagnose and treat disorders of the stomach and intestines.
A pediatrician is a doctor who specializes in child care from birth until age 18.

When to see a doctor?
You should contact your doctor immediately if you have the following symptoms:
Difficulty in breathing 
Difficulty in swallowing 
Confusion or disorientation 
Neck or throat pain 
Coughing  
Fatigue 
Noisy breathing 

Seek medical help from our trusted team of doctors.
Book your appointment now


Treatment Of Choking 
  The primary management of choking is to expel objects or foods blocking the throat. Also, treating the underlying causes is important to stop the episodes of choking. 

1. The Heimlich Maneuver
In the case of a person coughing forcefully, encourage them to continue coughing to clear the object.
Give the person 5 backflows by bending them forward and hitting firmly on their back with the heel of your hand between the shoulder blades to dislodge the object. 
In the case that a person is not able to cough, speak or breathe, however, needs immediate help. Give them abdominal thrusts, also known as the Heimlich maneuver, to prevent suffocation. 

Steps of The Heimlich Maneuver
Stand behind the person who is choking 
Place your arms around the waist and bend them forward
Clench your fists and place them above the belly of the person 
Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards
Repeat the above steps at least 5 times

Learn more about First aid for choking and how you can save a person's life. 
Click to read more


2. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)

CPR is given when the person is unresponsive and is not breathing or only gasping for air. It is a vital and essential skill that can save someone’s life. 
The two key elements of CPR are pressing on the chest, also called compressions, and providing breaths. 

CPR on adults 
Unless someone is trained in CPR including rescue breaths and feels confident using these skills, then only the person should give chest compressions with rescue breaths.
CPR on adults can be classified into two types:
Hands-only CPR 
CPR with rescue breaths
Hands-only CPR (Chest compression)
To carry out hands-only CPR, the steps are: 
Kneel down next to the person and place the heel of your hand at the center of their chest. Place the palm of the other hand right on the top of the hand placed above the chest to interlock the fingers
Position yourself in such a way that your shoulders are directly above your hands
Using your own body weight press straight down by 2 to 2.5 inches on their chest
Keeping your hands on their chest, and allow their chest to return to its original position
Repeat these compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 times a minute until the help arrives

 CPR with rescue breaths
Giving breaths during CPR can help maintain a supply of oxygen in the lungs. This helps in the circulation of oxygen in the vital organs. The preferred method to give breaths is by using a mask; however, mouth-to-mouth breaths can also be given.

To carry out CPR with rescue breaths, the steps are as follows: 
Place the heel of your hand on the center of the person's chest, then place the other hand palm on top and press down by 5 to 6 cm and give 100-120 compression at a steady rate
After every 30 chest compressions, give 2 rescue breaths
For giving rescue breaths, tilt the person's head gently and lift the chin up with 2 fingers and pinch the person’s nose. Seal your mouth over their mouth and blow steadily into their mouth for about 1 second
Continue with this pattern of cycles of 30 chest compressions and 2 rescue breaths until the person begins to recover or help arrives

Note: For children, it is recommended to carry out CPR with rescue breaths.

3. Intubation 
A breathing tube is passed into a person's windpipe (trachea). This helps push the object obstructing the airway out of the way enough to provide air to the lungs. 
If intubation is unsuccessful in a person then the doctor may perform a surgical procedure called cricothyrotomy which involves placing a tube through an incision in the cricothyroid membrane (CTM) to establish an airway for oxygenation and ventilation. 
Complications Of Choking 

Choking if not addressed immediately can lead to the following complications: 

1. Aspiration Pneumonia 
This is a chest infection that can develop after accidentally inhaling something, such as a small piece of food. It causes irritation in the lungs or damages them. 

2. Hypoxia
The most feared complication of foreign body airway obstruction is hypoxia which results in respiratory arrest, anoxic brain injury, and death.

3. Abdominal injury 
The complications with the Heimlich maneuver include injury to the abdomen and regurgitation of stomach contents. 
Frequently Asked Questions
What is most commonly choked on food?
Is choking a common emergency?
How do you prevent choking?
What age group is most at risk for choking?
Does choking increase with age?
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children are aged 1- 4 years and adults over 65 years.
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Throat
Pharynx
Larynx
Trachea
Lower respiratory tract
Mimicking Conditions
Dysphagia (Swallowing difficulties)
Pseudodysphagia (Lump in the throat)
Phagophobia (Swallowing/ choking phobia)
Necessary health tests/imaging
 Lab tests 
Swallow tests
Manometry and 24-hour pH study
 Imaging tests 
Barium X-ray
Endoscopy
Fiber-optic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES)
Videofluoroscopic Swallow Study (VFSS)
Computed Tomography (CT scan)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Treatment
The Heimlich Maneuver
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Breathes
Compression
Intubation
Specialists to consult
General physicians
Neurologists 
Gastroenterologists 
Pediatrician (in the case of children)
References
Cichero JAY. Age-Related Changes to Eating and Swallowing Impact Frailty: Aspiration, Choking Risk, Modified Food Texture and Autonomy of Choice. Geriatrics (Basel). 2018 Oct 12;3(4):69.
Dodson H, Cook J. Foreign Body Airway Obstruction. [Updated 2022 May 2]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Choking Prevention. Nationwide Children’s.February 2010.
Duckett SA, Bartman M, Roten RA. Choking. 2022 Sep 19. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Cramer N, Jabbour N, Tavarez MM, et al. Foreign Body Aspiration. [Updated 2022 Aug 1]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Akiyama N, Uozumi R, Akiyama T, Koeda K, Shiroiwa T, Ogasawara K. Choking injuries: Associated factors and error-producing conditions among acute hospital patients in Japan. PLoS One. 2022 Apr 27.
What should I do if someone is choking? National Health Service. 14 September 2022.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.