Tonsilitis
Also known as Inflammation of the tonsils and Amygdalitis
Overview

Tonsils are two round, fleshy masses in the back of your throat (pharynx). Tonsillitis is inflammation of the tonsils. It is mostly caused by common viruses, but bacterial infections also can be the cause of infection.

The classic presentation of tonsillitis includes sudden onset of fever and sore throat with inflammation of the tonsils. Children are most commonly affected during their school-going years. Other risk factors include family history, cold weather, diabetes, and air pollution.

The best way to prevent tonsillitis is to wash your hands often, especially before touching your nose or mouth. Also, avoid sharing food, drink, or utensils with someone who is sick. 

The management of tonsillitis mainly consists of resting, drinking fluids, and taking medications like painkillers, and antibiotics. In severe or recurrent cases surgical removal of tonsils, called tonsillectomy may be required.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children between 5 to 15 years of age.
Gender affected
Both men and women but is more common in women.
Body part(s) involved
Tonsils
Throat
Tongue
Lymph Nodes
Prevalence
World: 1.3% (2022)
Mimicking Conditions
Pharyngitis
Scarlet fever
Retropharyngeal abscess
Epiglottitis
Ludwig angina.
Peritonsillar abscess
Kawasaki disease
CoTonsillitissackie virus
Primary HIV
Ebstein-Barr virus
Herpes simplex tonsillitis 
Viral pharyngitis
Oral candidiasis
Necessary health tests/imaging
Throat swab
Rapid antigen test
Complete blood count (CBC)
Treatment
Antibiotics: PenicillinV, Amoxicillin, Cephalexin, Clindamycin, and Azithromycin
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): Paracetamol and Ibuprofen
Analgesics: Naproxen
Surgery: Tonsillectomy
See All
Symptoms Of Tonsillitis

The symptoms of tonsillitis generally occur suddenly and they may include

Fever (≦ 38℃)
Lymph node swellings
Swelling and redness of the tonsils
White or yellow coating on the tonsils
Sore throat
Mouth ulcers
Difficulty in swallowing
Rashes on the roof of the mouth 
Strawberry tongue
Bad breath
Decreased appetite
Fatigue

Note: Typically there is an absence of symptoms of a viral upper respiratory infection like conjunctivitis, runny nose, or cough. 

Don’t suffer from these symptoms. Rather, get some relief with our widest range of products to soothe your tonsils.
Buy tonsil products online
Buy Now
Causes Of Tonsillitis

Tonsillitis can be caused by both bacteria and viruses. Common bacteria that cause tonsillitis include beta-hemolytic and other streptococci. Though the role of viruses is uncertain, the most common infective agent in causing tonsillitis is the Epstein–Barr virus. It is present in 50% of children and 90% of adults. Cytomegalovirus is the other virus that can cause tonsillitis.

Want to understand better how respiratory viruses spread?
Watch this video now.
Types Of Tonsillitis

Tonsillitis can be classified based on its duration of onset as follows:
1. Acute tonsillitis
This type of tonsillitis is primarily caused by bacterial or viral infections. It presents with swelling and redness on the tonsils, along with fever, cough, and headache. These symptoms usually last 3 or 4 days but can also last up to 2 weeks.
2. Subacute tonsillitis
It is mostly caused by bacterial actinomyces. This type of tonsillitis can last between 3 weeks and 3 months.
3. Chronic tonsillitis
This is when you have a long-term tonsil infection. An infection that persists for more than a duration over 3 months is known as chronic tonsillitis. The virus usually stays and leads to chronic inflammation.
4. Recurrent tonsillitis
It is caused by bacterial infections, by streptococcus. Tonsillitis is termed recurrent when there are more than 7 episodes in 1 year.

Any infection that recurs more commonly than usual might be because of decreased immunity.
Read more about low immunity
Click Here
Risk Factors For Tonsillitis

Tonsillitis affects the younger age group and is mainly caused due to an infection with bacteria or viruses. Risk factors that can increase your chances of getting tonsillitis include-

1. Frequent exposure to viruses or bacteria
School-age children are usually in close contact with their friends and peers which increases their exposure to viruses or bacteria that can cause tonsillitis.

2. Young age
Studies show that the incidence peak of acute tonsillitis is observed in young children, especially the school-going age, but it may generally occur at any age.

3. Being immunocompromised
A decrease in immunity can be a major risk factor for inflammation of the tonsils causing tonsillitis.

Up your immunity levels with our extensive range of immunity-boosting products.
Shop Now

4. Environmental pollution
Air pollution can cause a huge rise in swollen adenoids and tonsillitis in children. Also, 
sore throat is a common side effect of exposure to polluted air. 

Learn more about how to protect your kids from air pollution.
Watch now


5. Colder climates
Cold weather does have an impact on your tonsils as tonsillitis is easy to recur during the change of seasons, especially in winter.

6. Genetics
Studies suggest that genetic inheritance determines the severity of tonsillar damage in pediatric patients with a history of recurrent chronic tonsillitis in both parents.

7. Diabetes
Studies suggest that the chances of infections are more in individuals with diabetes. Infections and problems with the ears, nose, and throat like tonsillitis can be symptoms of diabetes.

Want to master your diabetes?
Check out our diabetes care page and find products specially designed to meet all your needs.
Fill your carts now

8. Prolonged use of corticosteroids
Corticosteroids can raise your risk of infections because they have a wide range of effects on the immune system. This can lead to tonsillitis.

9. Obesity
Research suggests that there is a possible link between being overweight or obese and ear infections that can also affect the throat like tonsillitis.

Enlighten yourself now
Diagnosis Of Tonsillitis

Accurately diagnosing tonsillitis is important to reduce the further spread of infection and to limit complications. Diagnosis includes

1. History

A complete history provides important information to determine whether the patient has a sore throat, or whether there is deeper pain in the throat or neck. 

2. Physical examination

 Diagnosis of tonsillitis is mainly clinical and it is done by:

Carefully looking in the throat at the infection site with light instruments
Checking for any rash in the throat
Observing ‘toxic’ appearance and signs of dehydration
Palpating neck to check swollen lymph nodes
Listening to the voice of patient
Seeing if there is any enlargement of the spleen (can be a symptom of tonsillitis).

3. Laboratory tests

Throat swab: This is a simple test in which doctors rub a sterile swab over the back of your throat to get samples of secretions. The samples are later checked in the lab or the clinic.

Rapid antigen test: It may have low sensitivity in the diagnosis of bacterial tonsillitis but, the results for the presence of infection (positive or negative) are very fast.

Complete blood count (CBC): If the strep throat lab test is negative, then CBC is done to determine the cause of tonsillitis. In this test, the number of different cells is counted by taking small amounts of blood samples from patients.

Booking your lab tests just got easier. Get all the tests done in the comfort and safety of your home.
Find all the tests here
Celebs affected
Noah Centineo
Is an American actor who began his career performing on television. After his tonsillectomy, Centineo wrote on Instagram “Got my tonsils taken out 2 days ago. Goodbye chronic tonsillitis and strep throat. I hope you enjoyed your free stay for the last 7 years."
Miley Cyrus
Miley Ray Cyrus is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. She revealed via social media that she was hospitalized and later it was disclosed that she had undergone surgery for tonsillitis.
Prevention Of Tonsillitis

It can be a little difficult to prevent tonsillitis completely, but there are things you can do to reduce your risk. They include:

Always wash your hands often, especially before touching your nose or mouth
Avoid sharing food, drink, or utensils with someone who’s sick
Replace your toothbrush regularly, especially after infection
Practice good oral care
Keep a safe distance from tonsillitis patients 
Cover your mouth with a tissue or the hand when you cough or sneeze
Wash hands after coughing or sneezing
Keep your child at home if they are sick.

Want to know how you can prevent the spread of viral infections?
Click now to read
Doctor To Visit

The symptoms of tonsillitis can range from mild to severe. Doctors that can help you diagnose and treat tonsillitis include:
General physician
ENT specialist
Pediatrician

An ENT specialist, also called an otolaryngologist, is a doctor who has special training in diagnosing and treating diseases of the ear, nose, and throat. A pediatrician is a doctor who deals with the diseases of children. 

When to see a doctor?
You should contact your doctor immediately if you have the following symptoms:

Sore throat for four days or more
Fever over 38.33 degrees Celsius (101 degrees Fahrenheit)
Difficulty in swallowing 
Difficulty in breathing.
Painful or swollen tonsils.

If you or your loved ones are noticing any of the above symptoms, seek medical help from our trusted team of doctors.
Book your appointment now
Treatment Of Tonsillitis

The treatment of tonsillitis depends on whether the infection is viral or bacterial. Tonsillitis is very common, it can be managed with proper rest and medications. The management consists of the following:

A. Medications
1. Antibiotics: This therapy is indicated for patients with signs and symptoms of the sore throat along with tonsillitis and the laboratory confirmation of bacteria as the pathogen. The drugs include-
PenicillinV
Amoxicillin
Cephalexin
Clindamycin
Azithromycin

2. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): These medications are given to decrease inflammation and reduce fever. The commonly used drugs include

Paracetamol
Ibuprofen

3. Analgesics: These are a group of medications used to relieve pain. The most commonly used drug to manage pain include:

Paracetamol
Naproxen
Ibuprofen

Note: Certain studies in adults and children show that corticosteroids in combination with antibiotic treatment provide symptomatic relief of pain and faster recovery.

Get your medications online from India’s largest online pharmacy.
Order now

B. Surgery

Tonsillectomy is the surgical removal of the tonsils. Tonsillectomy may be considered after careful consideration of the risks and benefits and a thorough discussion of the options with the patient. It is usually performed when tonsillitis occurs frequently or doesn't respond to other treatments.
Home-care For Tonsillitis

The management of tonsillitis mainly depends on providing symptomatic relief along with a lot of rest. Some home remedies that can help relieve the symptoms include:

1. Gargling with salt water
Rinsing or gargling your mouth with warm salt water can help soothe pain caused by tonsillitis. It can also reduce inflammation, and may even help to treat infections. Just add ½ a tablespoon of salt to a glass of warm water and gargle to see the difference.

2. Using throat lozenges
Lozenges containing licorice as an ingredient have anti-inflammatory properties that can help soothe the discomfort and swelling in the tonsils and the throat.
  Get all types of lozenges with just a simple click.
Choose now

3. Drinking warm tea with honey
Studies suggest that raw honey has flavonoids and anti-inflammatory effects. Warm beverages like tea can help to reduce discomfort and adding raw honey may help to treat the infections causing tonsillitis.
  4. Trying cold therapy 
Cold can be highly effective in treating pain, inflammation, and swelling. Popsicles, frozen drinks, ice chips, and ice cream can be particularly helpful to young children who can’t use other home remedies safely. 

5. Getting humidifiers
Humidifiers can help if you are experiencing dry mouth as a result of tonsillitis. Dry air can irritate the throat, and humidifiers can help decrease the discomfort in the throat and tonsils by adding moisture back into the air. 

6. Drinking a lot of warm 
Drinking warm liquids, including soups, broths, and teas, can help soothe a sore throat. Herbal teas containing ingredients such as honey, pectin, or glycerine may help soothe irritation in the throat.

7. Eating softer food items
For people with tonsillitis, eating hard or sharp foods can be uncomfortable and even painful. Individuals with tonsillitis should try eating softer foods that are easier to swallow.

8. Not straining your voice
Swelling in the throat can cause the voice to become muffled. See a doctor immediately if you have too much pain while talking as it can indicate a complication.
Complications Of Tonsillitis

Tonsillitis, if left untreated can lead to complications like; 

Peritonsillar abscess/quinsy: This is the spread of infection beyond the tonsil that may lead to a collection of pus (abscess) within the space between the tonsils.

Airway obstruction: this is a rare complication and requires immediate care, where surgical intervention may be considered an emergency.

Post-Streptococcal glomerulonephritis: it is an inflammatory disorder of the kidneys that can manifest 1–2 weeks after a streptococcal throat infection. 

Rheumatic fever: Rheumatic fever is a rare, but serious, complication of untreated or partially treated tonsillitis caused due to streptococcus bacteria.

Scarlet fever: It is an infection caused by group A streptococci bacteria that affects the throat. This is the same bacteria that can cause tonsillitis.
 What is the difference between COVID-19 and tonsillitis?
Sore throat is a common symptom of both tonsillitis and COVID-19. However, tonsillitis causes discomfort and inflammation specific to the tonsils area rather than a generalized sore throat.
Get all your questions answered about COVID-19
Alternative Therapies For Tonsillitis

Mild cases of tonsillitis can be managed with certain home remedies and plenty of rest. Some of the alternative therapy that has shown some promising results include:

1. Homeopathy
Tonsillitis is common among children and homeopathy is very safe and highly effective in treating most cases of tonsillitis. Studies have shown that homeopathy has been quite effective in managing acute viral tonsillitis. Belladonna is the most commonly prescribed homeopathic medicine for tonsillitis. 

2. Acupuncture

This treatment can help reduce inflammation and provide analgesic pain relief for a sore throat. Studies demonstrate that certain acupoints are used to treat the common cold, influenza, acute tonsillitis, and other respiratory tract infections.
Living With Tonsillitis

Recurrent and acute tonsillitis is very common among children. Managing kids can be quite a task, especially when they are sick. Some of the tips that can help parents in managing their children with tonsillitis include:

Treat their pain and fever
Give them soft and warm foods
Tell them to take plenty of fluids
Try to make them gargle with salt water
Give them throat sprays instead of lozenges
Make them comfortable as much as possible
Be patient with them

Note: Talk to your doctor to understand the reason behind the recurrent infections and get the appropriate treatment. 

Read more about 10 things you need to do if your child has a fever
Tap here
Frequently Asked Questions
Is tonsillitis contagious?
What is the duration of tonsillitis?
Can tonsillitis be fatal?
What to expect after tonsillectomy?
Does tonsillitis happen in adults?
References
Windfuhr P et al. Clinical practice guideline: tonsillitis I. Diagnostics and nonsurgical management. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2016) 273:973–987.
Bartlett, A & Bola, Sumrit & Williams, R. (2015). Acute tonsillitis and its complications: an overview. Journal of the Royal Naval Medical Service. 101. 69-73. 10.1136/jrnms-101-69.
Georalas C et al. Tonsillitis. Clinical Evidence 2009;10:503.
Windfuhr JP, Toepfner N, Steffen G, Waldfahrer F, Berner R. Clinical practice guideline: tonsillitis I. Diagnostics and nonsurgical management. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016 Apr;273(4):973-87.
Casqueiro J, Casqueiro J, Alves C. Infections in patients with diabetes mellitus: A review of pathogenesis. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar;16 Suppl 1(Suppl1):S27-36.
Yuen-yu L et al. The Correlation Among Obesity, Apnea-Hypopnea Index, and Tonsil Size in Children.Journal for Chest. Volume 130, Issue 6, December 2006.
Norton L et al. The treatment of streptococcal tonsillitis/pharyngitis in young children. World Journal of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (2021)7, 161e165.
Apeksha S Ovhal et al. A Review on Tonsillitis. Ijppr.Human, 2022; Vol. 23 (2): 249-254.
Bulut F, Cumbul A, Ballica B. Clinical Importance of Family History in Recurrent Chronic Tonsillitis Pediatric Patients: Review. J Pediatrics & Pediatric Med. 2020; 4(3): 1-5
Mandal MD, Mandal S. Honey: its medicinal property and antibacterial activity. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 2011 Apr;1(2):154-60.
Malapane E, Solomon EM, Pellow J. Efficacy of a homeopathic complex on acute viral tonsillitis. J Altern Complement Med. 2014;20(11):868-873.
Liu M, Sheng H, Huang J, Xuan M, Ouyang W, Zhang Y, Zhou S, Zeng L, Fu L, Chen Y, Huang X, Huang K, Wu Y, Liu X, Zhang L. The efficacy and safety of self-administered acupressure on respiratory tract infection in chronic kidney disease: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Transl Med. 2022 Jun;10(12):688.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.