Head lice
Also known as Pediculus humanus capitis
Overview
Head lice are tiny insects that live as parasites in the hair of the scalp. They are tiny, six legged wingless insects that exclusively feed on human blood. As normally believed, lice infestation is not a sign of being dirty or sick and there are no long-term health problems associated with it. The major concern of getting lice is the constant irritation and scratching of the head and also the fear of spreading it to others. 

Although lice are commonly found in school going kids, it can also affect adults. One can choose to manage lice by finding them manually with hands or trying products which are available to tackle them. Choose a one that fits your needs from the options available such as soaps, creams, shampoos, combing and medicines (doctors may prescribe pills in some cases). Dealing with head lice can be frustrating, but be patient. Follow the treatments and prevention tips religiously as advised by your doctor for lice free hair.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Common in children between 3 to 12 years of age
Gender affected
Both males and females but more common in females
Body part(s) involved
Scalp
Hair
Mimicking Conditions
Dandruff
Seborrhea
Superficial fungal infection
Eczema
Folliculitis
Scabies
Impetigo
Treatment
Pyrethrin
Permethrin
Benzyl alcohol lotion 5% 
Ivermectin lotion 0.5%
Malathion lotion 0.5%
Spinosad 0.9% topical suspension
Lindane shampoo 1%
Specialists to consult
General physician
Pediatrician
Dermatologist
Causes 

A head louse (plural is lice) is a tan or grayish, tiny six-legged insect about the size of a flax seed. It clings to the scalp and hair and feeds on human blood. 

The lice eggs or nits hatch into nymphs, which become full grown lice. Adult lice mate in order to produce more nits. The three stages of life cycle are explained in detail:

Lice Eggs or Nits
Nits are firmly attached to the hair shaft by a glue-like sticky substance produced by a female louse. They are usually yellow or white in color, oval in shape and 2-3 mm in length. Nits take about six to nine days to hatch. They are not easily visible and are often confused with dandruff.

Nymphs
A nit hatches into a small louse called a nymph. The nymphs require human blood for survival and mature into adults in about seven to ten days after hatching. 

Adult lice 
Adults have a life of about one month. The female lays 6 to 10 eggs a day and are usually larger than males. If the louse falls off a person, and does not get human blood, it dies within a day or two.
Symptoms Of Head Lice

In most cases, head lice are not immediately noticed after infestation. The eggs laid by head lice are called nits. It is when you experience intense itching on the head and appearance of nits, does it indicate head lice. Some of the common signs and symptoms of head lice are:
Itching or the urge to scratch
Tingling or a crawling sensation like feeling of something moving in the hair
Difficulty in sleeping due to itching as lice are active at night
Red sores on the head, neck, and shoulders (caused by scratching)
Swollen lymph nodes
Head lice and their eggs are most frequently seen by looking closely near the hair root. They are most commonly found behind the ears and upper part of the back of the neck. Rarely, they may be seen on the eyelashes, eyebrows, or beard. 
Risk Factors for Head Lice

While most people think head lice are caused due to unclean hair and scalp, this is not true. Having head-lice is not a sign of poor personal hygiene or an unclean living environment. Head lice don't carry bacterial or viral infections. They feed on blood and can affect almost anyone. 

However, girls are known to be more at risk than boys to get infected because they tend to have more head to head contact as compared to boys. Also, girls with long, thick and curly hair may find it hard to fight lice infestation as it makes it difficult to find the parasites in their hair.

Head lice cannot jump or fly. They can only crawl. Hence, transmission from one person to another usually happens by direct head-to-head contact. It is often seen within a family or among children who have close contact at schools, play groups etc.

Indirect transmission is not very common, but one may be at risk of getting head lice while sharing items like:
Combs
Hats or scarves
Towels
Helmets
Bedding
Hair brushes or Hair accessories
Headphones
Clothes
Diagnosis Of Head Lice

As head lice are around 2- 3 mm long and have the ability to hold tight onto the hair strands and crawl along, it makes it difficult to find them in your hair. The only way to find them is through combing and manual examination.

1. Thorough combing (using a fine-tooth comb) of wet hair, especially at the back of the head where lice are commonly found, may help in finding lice.
2. Manual examination of the hair may show nits fixed to the base of hair shafts. They can look like dandruff or dirt. Pull the little speck with your fingers. While dandruff and dirt can be removed, nit usually remains stuck. It can be tough to find a nymph or adult louse as they move very fast. 
Prevention Of Head Lice

The first and foremost tip you need to keep in the mind is the fact that there is no effective method to prevent head lice. But there are ways to stop the spread of head lice from one person to another. So if anyone in your family suffers from head lice, here are a few tips that you must follow.
Wash clothes, bedding, and towels in hot water and dry them on the hottest setting. 
Opt for dry cleaning if you can’t wash these items at home.
You can use a vacuum to clean furniture, carpet, and car seats. 
Things that cannot be washed such as soft toys and pillows should be put into a plastic bag and sealed for at least two weeks.
Do not share a bed with a person infested with lice as there is a high possibility of lice getting transferred through direct head to head contact.
Do not use the combs, brushes and hair care products used by a person who has head lice.
It is wise to throw away or sterilize and use for the future.
Do not send your child to school if he/she has head lice.
Specialist To Visit
If you experience severe itching and scratching due to head lice infestation or if you find it difficult to sleep at night, then it is wise to consult a doctor and get it treated immediately. For this you can either visit a:
General Physician
Pediatrician 
Dermatologist
Treatment Of Head Lice

Once lice have settled on your scalp, they don’t go away on their own again. In most cases, treatment is aimed at killing the parasites by suffocating them. 

Some of the common Over-the-counter treatment options for head lice include:

1. Pyrethrin
It is an over-the-counter medicine that contains naturally occurring pyrethroid extracts. It can kill only live lice and not nits (unhatched eggs). This is why a second treatment after 9 to 10 days of first treatment is recommended to kill the newly hatched lice and prevent them from producing new eggs. It is approved for use in kids above 2 years and older.

2. Permethrin
It is a synthetically available form of the naturally occurring pyrethrin extracts. Permethrin lotion 1% is an FDA-approved product for the treatment of head lice. It is safe and effective when used as per the doctor’s advice. Just like pyrethrin, it kills live lice but not unhatched eggs, so a second dose is recommended after 9 to 10 days to be effective against head lice.

Some of the common prescription medications for head lice include:

1. Benzyl alcohol lotion, 5%
An FDA-approved product for head lice treatment, it is found to be safe and effective when used as per doctor’s direction. It kills lice but not unhatched eggs, so a second treatment after 7 days of the first is recommended.

2. Ivermectin lotion, 0.5%
This formulation prevents newly hatched lice from surviving. It is known to be effective when applied on dry hair without nit combing. It can be applied once to dry hair and then rinsed with water after 10 minutes. Ivermectin is also available as a tablet. It can be taken if other topical treatments fail to eliminate lice.

3. Malathion lotion, 0.5%
It is known to kill lice and also kills some eggs. A second treatment after 7-9 days of the first is advised to make it more effective in action. It is recommended for use in kids above 6 years and older. As this lotion is flammable, it is not advisable to not use electrical devices such as hair dryers after applying this lotion or when the hair is wet.

4. Spinosad 0.9% topical suspension
It kills both live lice and unhatched eggs, hence retreatment is not required. Nit combing is also not required. It is approved for the treatment of children above 6 months and older.

5. Lindane shampoo 1%
It is usually recommended for use as a second-line treatment only as overuse or misuse of this drug can cause toxic side-effects on the brain and nervous system. It is not advised for treatment in people with HIV, seizure disorder, pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and those with skin sores. Also, retreatment is strictly not recommended. 
Home-care For Head Lice

Here are some tips to deal with head lice at home:
Wet combing is usually preferred to remove lice from hair for young children. Use a regular brush or comb to remove tangles from wet hair before using a special comb.
Use a special fine-toothed comb to carefully comb out nits and lice from hair. Pull the comb through the hair from roots to ends. Comb the entire head at least twice.
The nits (lice eggs) mature in 5-7 days so it is important to comb every day for about 2 weeks to ensure you get rid of all the lice.
You can get a prescription for kids if combing doesn’t work and the infestation is severe.
Beware of using natural remedies like olive oil or butter and toxic substances such as kerosene to get rid of head lice as these might cause more harm than good.
Complications Of Head Lice

Head lice if left ignored can lead to severe itching and scratching of the head. If a person scratches an itchy scalp from a head-lice infestation, it is possible for the skin to break and develop an infection. In the worst case scenario, you might need to visit a dermatologist to get a secondary bacterial infection of the skin treated due to head lice.
Alternative Therapies for Head Lice

A number of household products are commonly used for the treatment of head lice. But do not use natural remedies such as olive oil, butter, petroleum jelly and mayonnaise to get rid of head lice. It is believed that these remedies work by suffocating the lice but do no good as lice are difficult to suffocate.
Avoid using toxic compounds like gasoline and kerosene to get a risk of lice. There is no research evidence on the same. Moreover, it can lead to serious injury.
Living With Head Lice

Head lice can be very annoying, but they are not dangerous and they don't spread any disease. Neither are they a sign of poor hygiene. They need blood for survival which is not dependent on hygiene of the head or surroundings. They can be managed by various treatment options and various other measures like:

1. Do not use combs, hair brushes, hats, bedding, towels, or clothing of a person affected with head lice.
3. The lice and eggs can be removed to some extent with the help of a very fine toothed comb on wet hair.
4. Medication includes pediculicides (medicines which kill lice) with ovicidal effect (which kill nits or unhatched eggs) which is the most important treatment.
5. To prevent reinfestation, nits are killed by using hot air (slightly cooler than a hair dryer) for 30 minutes.
6. Wash all clothes, beddings, and combs in hot water with detergent.
7. Repeat treatment after 7 to 10 days.


Frequently Asked Questions
Do head lice live on pillows?
Do head lice go away on their own?
Can you feel lice crawling?
Can a hair dryer kill lice?
Can head lice survive on carpet and furniture?
Do I need to wash pillows after I have lice?
How long can you have lice before noticing?
Can vinegar kill head lice?
References
Mazurek CM, Lee NP. How to manage head lice. West J Med. 2000;172(5):342-345.
Cummings C, Finlay JC, MacDonald NE. Head lice infestations: A clinical update. Paediatr Child Health. 2018;23(1):e18-e24.
Treatment. Head lice. Parasites. The Centres of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Meister L, Ochsendorf F. Head Lice. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2016;113(45):763-772.
Head lice infestations: A clinical update. Paediatr Child Health. 2004;9(9):647-657.
Burgess IF, Silverston P. Head lice. BMJ Clin Evid. 2015;2015:1703.
InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. Head lice: Overview. 2008 Mar 5 [Updated 2018 Dec 13].
Van der Wouden JC, Klootwijk T, Le Cleach L, et al. Interventions for treating head lice. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;2018(5):CD009321.
Coscione S, Kositz C, Marks M. Head Lice: An Under-Recognized Tropical Problem. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017;97(6):1636-1637.
Saraswat N, Shankar P, Chopra A, Mitra B, Kumar S. Risk Factors Associated with Head Lice Infestation in Rural Pediatric Patients. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2020;11(1):25-28.
Sangaré AK, Doumbo OK, Raoult D. Management and Treatment of Human Lice. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:8962685.
Singhasivanon OU, Lawpoolsri S, Mungthin M, Yimsamran S, Soonthornworasiri N, Krudsood S. Prevalence and Alternative Treatment of Head-Lice Infestation in Rural Thailand: A Community-Based Study. Korean J Parasitol. 2019;57(5):499-504.
Falagas ME, Matthaiou DK, Rafailidis PI, Panos G, Pappas G. Worldwide prevalence of head lice. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14(9):1493-1494.
Bragg BN, Simon LV. Pediculosis. [Updated 2020 Nov 20]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2021 Jan.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.