Stye
Also known as sty a hordeolum
Overview
A stye is a painful red bump on the rim of the eyelid that may look similar to a boil or a pimple. They are often caused by a bacterial infection in the hair follicle of an eyelash. 

Risk factors for developing a stye include poor eyelid hygiene, rubbing or touching the eyes, wearing contact lenses for an extended period, and certain underlying medical conditions such as diabetes.

Most styes resolve on their own within a few days to a week. It is important to avoid squeezing or popping them since the infection may reach to other parts of the eyelid or eye. Warm compresses applied to the affected area might help reduce inflammation and facilitate healing. Antibiotic eye drops or ointments may be recommended in some circumstances to speed up the healing process and prevent complications.

If a stye does not improve after a week, gets very painful, or interferes with vision, it is best to see an eye doctor.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults between 30- 50 years of age.
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Eyes
Mimicking Conditions
Basal Cell Carcinoma
Chalazion
Pneumo-Orbita
Preseptal Cellulitis
Sebaceous Gland Carcinoma
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Necessary health tests/imaging
Patient history and physical examination
Treatment
Use warm compresses
Antibiotic treatment: Erythromycin ointment and eye drops
Pain relief medications: Ibuprofen,  Acetaminophen 
Surgery
Specialists to consult
General Physician
Ophthalmologist
Symptoms Of Stye 
  A painful red bump on the edge of the eyelid may look similar to a boil or a pimple.
Tenderness, swelling, or pain in the eyelid
A gritty, scratchy sensation, as if there is a foreign body in the eye
Sensitivity to light
Excessive tearing
Types of stye
  There are two kinds of styes:
1. External stye 
It develops at the base of the eyelash due to an infection in the hair follicle resembling a pimple.  It can be pus-filled and is painful to touch.

2. Internal stye 
It grows inside the eyelid due to an infection in a meibomian gland (oil-producing gland)and is considerably more painful than an external stye. It can produce continual pain and irritation in the eye, as well as the sensation that something is stuck in the eye.

Did you know?
People generally confuse stye with chalazion. While a stye is a painful swelling that usually occurs at the edge of the eyelid and is caused by an infected eyelash root, a chalazion is usually not painful and appears further back on the eyelid than a stye. It occurs when the oil gland in the eyelid clogs. 
Causes Of Stye
  Stye is a bacterial infection caused by the bacterium staphylococcus. Our eyelids include numerous oil glands that produce an oily film on the surface of the eye, which aids in the maintenance of healthy eye lubrication. However, these oil glands might become clogged due to old oil, debris, dead skin cells, or germs. When this occurs, debris accumulates, resulting in gland clogging. Stye can also be caused by blepharitis (swelling of eyelid). This condition causes the eyelids at the base of the lashes to become red and puffy.
Risk Factors For Stye

Anyone can have stye but there are the following reasons which can make you more prone to have stye, such as:
Skin conditions such as seborrhoeic dermatitis
Medical conditions such as diabetes, high serum lipids etc.
History of stye or chalazion
Poor hygiene of eyes
Blepharitis (irritated, swollen eyelids)
Using old and contaminated eye makeup
Wearing contact lenses

Do you wear contact lenses? Have a look at some of the common mistakes that contact lens wearers make!
Read Now

Did you know?
Wearing masks led to a rise in cases of stye during the COVID-19 pandemic.Research has shown that wearing a mask or breathing upward while wearing a mask, improperly-fitted masks, and fogging glasses, can cause the skin around the eyes to become oily and congested, increasing the risk of styes.
Diagnosis Of Stye

An ophthalmologist can diagnose a stye by conducting a physical examination of the affected eye. During the examination, the ophthalmologist will inspect the eyelid to look for any visible signs of a stye, such as redness, swelling, or a small bump on the eyelid.
The ophthalmologist may also ask the patient about their symptoms, such as pain or discomfort in the affected eye, and whether they have had styes in the past.
In some cases, the ophthalmologist may also conduct a culture test to determine the exact type of bacteria causing the stye.
Celebs affected
Selena Gomez
The singer and actress have been photographed with a visible stye on her eye on several occasions.
Kim Kardashian
The reality TV star Kim Kardashian once tweeted about having a stye and asked her followers for home remedies.
Sam Smith
The famous English singer and songwriter, Sam Smith revealed his experience with stye. He underwent a 15-minute procedure to remove a stye on his right eye.
Prevention Of Stye
  There are several tips that can be done to maintain eye hygiene and prevent stye, such as:
Before touching your eyes or the skin around your eyes, always thoroughly wash your hands.
Disinfect your contact lenses on a regular basis.
Before going to bed, remove any eye makeup.
Use only cosmetic eye products that are not outdated or expired.
Avoid sharing a towel with someone having stye or chalazion.
You can also take fish oil supplements to prevent clogging of oil glands.

Explore our wide range of omega and fish oil supplements.
Buy Now
Preventive measures to prevent stye in children:
A stye is a common eye infection that can occur in children of all ages. Here are some precautions you can take to prevent stye in children:
Teach children to avoid rubbing their eyes as it can spread bacteria from the hands to the eye area.
Encourage children to wash their hands frequently to prevent the spread of bacteria that can cause stye.
Ensure children use a clean towel and washcloth when cleaning their face or eyes.
Teach children to avoid sharing towels, washcloths, and eye makeup with others, as this can spread bacteria.
If your child wears contact lenses, ensure that they follow proper hygiene practices and avoid sleeping in contact lenses.
Ensure that children do not share eye drops or other eye medications with others.
Consult with your child's healthcare provider if your child is experiencing recurring styes or if the stye does not improve after a few days.
Specialist To Visit

Usually, a stye begins to improve over a few days. However, it is very important to consult a doctor in case:
You experience vision problems.
The eyelid bump worsens and there is no improvement after a week or two of self-care.
Eyelid lumps can grow to be exceedingly huge or painful.
You have a blister on your lower eyelid.
You have crusting or scaling of your eyelids.
Your whole eyelid is red, or the eye itself is red.
The redness or swelling extends to the upper eyelid or other portions of your face.
The whites of your eye become red.
You are very sensitive to light or have excessive tears.
Another stye comes back soon after successful treatment of a stye.
Your eyelid bump bleeds.
  The doctors that may help to diagnose stye include: 
General Physician
Ophthalmologist

Consult with our experienced team of doctors
Book an appointment now
Did you know?
Most people are unaware of the right eye specialist. Know about different eye specialists in detail. 
Tap To Know
Treatment Of Stye

A stye is usually a self-limiting condition that resolves itself within a week.
But your eye doctor may recommend treatment, including:
1. Use warm compresses
Apply a warm, damp towel to the affected region for at least 15 minutes four times each day. Massage the afflicted region carefully with clean fingers. It may also aid in the opening of clogged pores, allowing them to drain and repair themselves. Twice daily, use a wet cotton bud to clean the base of the eyelashes. However, do not pinch a stye or any other sort of eyelid lump. Allow it to drain on its own.
  Note: If you have a stye carefully brush out extra oils from the edges of your lids. You can use warm water and no-tears baby shampoo.

Explore our wide range of baby skincare shampoo.
Tap here
2. Antibiotic treatment
Your ophthalmologist may prescribe erythromycin ophthalmic ointment, or antibiotic eye drops for 7-10 days.
Systemic antibiotics are sometimes used when local antibiotics are not effective or when the infection is not localized.
3. Use over-the-counter (OTC) pain relief
Take over-the-counter pain medication like ibuprofen or acetaminophen to reduce pain and discomfort.
4. Surgery to drain the area
Surgical incision and drainage may be advised if medicinal treatment does not relieve your stye. This procedure is frequently performed in the doctor's office under local anesthesia.
5. Intense Pulsed Light Therapy (IPL)
This is a form of heat therapy that involves light with specific wavelengths to stimulate the meibomian glands and reduce inflammation around the eyes. Depending on the severity of the meibomitis, several sittings may be required.
Home-care For Stye

There are the following tips that will reduce e the duration of a stye and prevent recurrences:
A stye can be treated and cured quicker when you apply a warm compress to the eye. 
Don't wear eye makeup or contact lenses until the area has healed.
Try warm tea bags. It helps reduce swelling around the affected area of the stye.
Avoid popping, squeezing or picking at a stye. Otherwise, it can lead to further irritation and infection, which prolongs the healing process.
Gentle massage and apply light pressure. It can help encourage the stye to drain on its own.
Complications Of Stye

It is extremely rare for any complication to occur with respect to the development of stye. Possible complications are discussed below:
1. Chalazion (meibomian cyst)
A stye occurs when the meibomian gland (which secretes sebum to moisturize the eye) becomes inflamed and congested. Stye formation inside the eyelid on a regular basis may result in cyst formation near the aperture of the meibomian gland.  
2. Preseptal or periorbital cellulitis
Since stye is a bacterial infection, if left untreated or just partially treated, it can spread to the surrounding tissues around the eye, including the periorbital tissues. 
This type of infection is known as preseptal or periorbital cellulitis, and it causes the skin around the eye to grow red and swollen. Antibiotics are essential to treat this condition.
3. Orbital cellulitis
If the preseptal cellulitis progresses further inward it can cause orbital cellulitis. Given the severity of the illness and the seriousness of the condition, hospitalization and intravenous antibiotics may be necessary. It may require immediate surgery to drain the pus.
Alternative Therapies For Stye

Alternative therapies include:
1. Bloodletting therapy
This technique aids in eliminating “Heat” and Qi/Blood stagnation (a slowing or pooling of the blood due to a disruption of heart qi) that can help recover stye.
2. Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a traditional Chinese medicine technique that involves sticking finely pointed needles in areas of the body known as acupuncture points. Applying gentle pressure using your fingertips on the infraorbital foramen and near the base of the thumb, can help tackle the symptoms of a stye and provide relief from the pain and inflammation. Styes usually resolve on their own, but acupuncture can speed recovery and lessen symptoms. It is also believed that the needles stimulate specific nerves and muscles, which in turn release natural pain-relieving hormones in the body.

Note: To help support the acupuncture treatment, maintaining a healthy simple diet is recommended. Hot, stimulating foods such as coffee and hot peppers are not recommended. 
Living With Stye

A stye can significantly impact a person's quality of life, both physically and emotionally.
Here are some of the ways a stye can impact your quality of life:
1. Physical impact
A stye can cause pain, redness, and swelling, making it uncomfortable to open or close the affected eye. This can interfere with daily activities such as reading, working, and driving. 
In some cases, a stye may also cause blurred vision or sensitivity to light, further affecting a person's ability to perform tasks.
2. Emotional impact
A stye can lead to self-consciousness and embarrassment, particularly if it is visible to others. People with styes may feel uncomfortable interacting with others or may avoid social situations altogether. Additionally, the discomfort and inconvenience of a stye may lead to feelings of frustration and irritability.
While a stye is usually a minor condition that resolves on its own, seeking prompt treatment and practicing good eye hygiene can help to prevent styes and minimize their impact on daily life.
Frequently Asked Questions
Are styes contagious?
Can a stye turn into a chalazion?
How long does it take for a stye to leave?
How many times a day should I treat a stye?
Can styes keep coming back?
References
Stye - StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Boyd K. What are Chalazia and Styes? [Internet]. American Academy of Ophthalmology. 2022 [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Hordeolum (Stye) [Internet]. AOA.org. [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Risk factors [Internet]. Stanford Health Care (SHC) - Stanford Medical Center. 2020 [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Stye in eyelid: Types, symptoms & treatment [Internet]. Eye Solutions. [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Medicine SIUF. What is the best treatment for a hordeolum (stye)? : Evidence-based practice [Internet]. LWW. [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Qiao H-W, Liu N-W, Wang J, Huang S, Yu L, Chen Z. Bloodletting at EX-HN6 as an adjunctive therapy to eye drops for Stye: A meta-analysis [Internet]. Medicine. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2020 [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Acupuncture and oriental medicine for Styes [Internet]. Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine for Styes - Acufinder.com. [cited 2023Apr26]. Available from:
Silkiss, R.Z., Paap, M.K. and Ugradar, S. (2021) Increased incidence of Chalazion associated with face mask wear during the COVID-19 pandemic, American journal of ophthalmology case reports. U.S. National Library of Medicine. Available at:
Styes in children (no date) Styes in Children - Health Encyclopedia - University of Rochester Medical Center. Available at:
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.