Gastritis
Overview
  Gastritis is a digestive disorder that involves inflammation, irritation and erosion in the stomach lining. It can occur suddenly (acute) or gradually (chronic).

Symptoms of gastritis include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, bloating, loss of appetite, and a feeling of fullness. In some cases, gastritis can lead to bleeding, resulting in blood in vomit or dark stools.

The most common causes of gastritis include H.Pylori bacterial infection and long-term use of Nonteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like aspirin, ibuprofen.

Individuals experiencing persistent or severe symptoms should seek medical attention for proper evaluation and personalized guidance. Healthcare professionals can provide tailored treatment plans based on specific needs and medical and personal history.

The treatment goal of gastritis is to address the underlying cause and reduce the amount of acid in the stomach to relieve symptoms, allowing the stomach lining to heal. Lifestyle changes such as avoiding triggers, adopting a healthy diet, and managing stress can aid in management and promote healing.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Individuals between 45 - 64 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Mimicking Conditions
Peptic ulcer disease
Gastric cancer
Cholecystitis
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Dyspepsia
Gallstone disease
Pancreatitis
Gastric involvement with inflammatory bowel disease, particularly Crohn disease
Menetrier disease
Lymphoma
Celiac disease
Multiple endocrine neoplasias
Necessary health tests/imaging
Esophageal pH test
Lab tests: Blood tests, stool test
Imaging tests- Upper endoscopy
Biopsy
Barium swallow test
Treatment
Antibiotic medications: clarithromycin, amoxicillin,  metronidazole 
Proton pump inhibitor (PPI): Esomeprazole, lansoprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole
H2 blockers: Cimetidine, ranitidine, nizatidine, famotidine
Antacids: Aluminium hydroxide , magnesium hydroxide, calcium carbonate, sodium bicarbonate
Specialists to consult
General physician
Internal Medicine specialist
Gastroenterologist
Symptoms Of Gastritis 
  Gastritis refers to the inflammation of the lining of the stomach. This inflammation can disrupt the normal production of stomach acid and digestive enzymes, which are important for the breakdown and digestion of food. As a result, individuals with gastritis may experience the following symptoms:

Piercing, gripping pain in the stomach
Feeling of fullness
Burning feeling in the stomach between meals or at night
Burning feeling in the chest due to acid reflux
Belching or burping
Lack of appetite
Stomach bloating
Hiccups
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea

Symptoms of severe gastritis may include:
Blood in vomit
Black, tarry stools
Chest pain
Shortness of breath
Weakness
High fever
Inability to take any foods or liquids by the mouth.
Did you know there is a potential link between covid 19 and digestive conditions?
The SARS-CoV-2 virus, which causes COVID-19, can affect various parts of the digestive system. Individuals with pre-existing gastritis or other digestive conditions may be at a higher risk of experiencing adverse outcomes if they contract COVID-19.
Learn more about COVID-19
Types of Gastritis
  There are broadly two types of gastritis, acute and chronic.

1. Acute gastritis
It is characterized by a sudden inflammation of the stomach lining, commonly caused by irritants or infections. 
It leads to symptoms like nausea, vomiting, bloating, gas, weight loss, and loss of appetite. 
Simple treatments and removal of the underlying cause usually result in a quick resolution of symptoms.

2. Chronic gastritis
It refers to persistent, low-grade inflammation and damage to the stomach lining, often associated with H. pylori infection.
People with chronic gastritis often have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. Symptoms might include tiredness and anemia.

Note: Gastritis refers to inflammation of the stomach lining, while antral gastritis specifically involves inflammation of the antrum, which is the lower part of the stomach near the entrance to the small intestine.


Did you know that gastritis can be common during pregnancy?
Gastritis can develop during pregnancy due to hormonal and physical changes. The pressure exerted on the stomach by the growing uterus also exacerbates gastritis symptoms. Explore our exquisite collection of pregnancy care essentials and embrace the beautiful journey of pregnancy.
Buy Now
Causes Of Gastritis

A. Major Causes and Risk factors
Infectious agents especially Helicobacter pylori, and NSAIDs are responsible for the majority of people with gastritis:

1. H.Pylori-associated gastritis
H.pylori gastritis is one of the most common causes of gastritis. It occurs due to the presence of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) bacteria in the stomach that infect the stomach lining and cause inflammation. It is often contracted through contaminated food or water.

2. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Frequent or long-term use of NSAIDs such as aspirin, ibuprofen, or naproxen can irritate the stomach lining, causing erosive gastritis. These medications can disrupt the protective mechanisms of the stomach, leading to inflammation.

Prolonged use of painkillers can affect the regulation of prostaglandin hormones. Prostaglandins help regulate stomach mucus and substances that neutralize the gastric acid. Without enough prostaglandin, the stomach wall loses protection from acid.

Note: Combined use of painkillers with steroids can worsen the damaging effects on the gastric lining.

B. Other Causes and Risk factors
The following factors can also contribute to the development of gastritis. Chronic gastritis is a condition that may develop due to repeated or persistent exposure to many of these factors.

Virus: Viruses such as enterovirus, epstein-Barr virus, can cause viral gastritis. 

Parasitic infections: Parasites such as cryptosporidium are also known to cause gastritis.

Fungal infections: Fungal infections such as candidiasis can also cause gastritis. Fungal infections typically occur in individuals with weakened immune systems.

Alcohol: Heavy or prolonged alcohol consumption can irritate and damage the stomach lining, making individuals more susceptible to alcohol gastritis.

Smoking: Smoking has been identified as a risk factor for gastritis. It can weaken the protective lining of the stomach and impair the healing process, increasing the risk of inflammation.

Let us help you with our quit-smoking range.
Explore Now
  Age: Gastritis can affect individuals of any age, but the risk tends to increase with age. Older adults may have a higher risk due to factors such as a weakened immune system, prolonged use of medications, and a higher likelihood of H. pylori infection.

Stress: While stress itself may not directly cause gastritis, it can worsen symptoms and increase the risk of developing the condition. Chronic stress may influence the production of stomach acid and disrupt the normal functioning of the digestive system.

Autoimmune disorders: In some cases, the immune system may mistakenly attack the cells of the stomach lining, leading to autoimmune gastritis. This type of gastritis is less common but can be chronic and severe.

Systemic conditions: Certain systemic diseases can also contribute to the development of gastritis. Some of them are discussed below:
Crohn's disease (a type of inflammatory bowel disease)
Vasculitis (inflammation of blood vessels)
Sarcoidosis (growth of inflammatory cells)
Ischemia (reduced blood flow)

Bile reflux: When bile from the small intestine flows back into the stomach, it can irritate and inflame the stomach lining, causing gastritis. 

Radiation Therapy: Exposure to high doses of radiation, such as during radiation therapy for cancer treatment, can cause gastritis. The radiation damages the cells of the stomach lining, leading to inflammation and discomfort.

Obesity: While obesity itself is not considered a direct risk factor for gastritis, it can still play an indirect role in its development. Obesity-related factors such as acid reflux, increased stomach pressure, and unhealthy dietary choices have the potential to irritate the stomach lining and exacerbate symptoms of gastritis. 


Do you know the difference between gastritis and gastroenteritis?
Gastritis is inflammation of the stomach which is mostly but not always caused by an infection. Whereas, gastroenteritis is inflammation of the stomach and intestines, which is principally caused by an infection.
Read more about gastroenteritis.
Diagnosis Of Gastritis
  Your doctor will take a thorough medical history, including any medications you are taking and your family history. This will be followed by a physical examination.

To diagnose gastritis, doctors typically use a combination of the following tests:

1. Esophageal pH test
This test helps measure stomach acid by checking how much stomach acid enters through the food pipe and how long it stays in the stomach. 

2. Lab tests
CBC - This test checks for high levels of white blood cells indicative of inflammation or infection. The test also looks for anemia, or a low red blood cell count, an indicator of blood loss, which can be linked to gastritis.

Stool test- It checks for H. Pylori or other infections. It is also useful in ruling out other infections that cause chronic diarrhea.

H. Pylori Breath test- In this test, you are given a special solution to swallow. If the H. pylori bacteria are present in the gut, gas by-products are released and detected in your breath.

Helicobacter Pylori Antibodies Panel (IgA, IgG & IgM) test - This test is used to detect the presence of IgA, IgG and IgM antibodies against H. pylori infection.

3. Imaging tests
Upper Endoscopy- During this procedure, a small flexible tube (known as an endoscope) is inserted down the throat to examine the lining of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine.

Barium swallow test (esophagram): In this procedure, you need to drink a liquid barium mixture. An X-ray of the chest and upper abdomen is then done to help identify any physical excessive alcohol consumption or any other abnormalities in the stomach or esophagus.

4. Biopsy: A small piece of tissue is removed from the inside of the stomach for further testing and analysis. 
Celebs affected
Deepika Samson
Hindi Tv Soap actor, Deepika Samson once shared her experience of back pain which was an the outcome of severe gastritis.
Lady Gaga
Lady Gaga, a renowned singer and actress, revealed in 2013 that she had to cancel several tour dates due to a severe case of gastritis. Her condition improved with the help of relaxation techniques.
Prevention Of Gastritis

While it is not possible to completely eliminate the risk of gastritis, there are measures you can take to reduce it. Here are some tips that may help prevent gastritis:

1. Make dietary changes
A clean, well-balanced wholesome diet is the cornerstone of overall health and immunity and can help evade gastritis. At the same time, it is important to identify and avoid any specific foods or beverages that seem to worsen your symptoms. 

Consume
Fiber-rich foods 
Flavonoid and antioxidant-rich fruits, vegetables, and beverages 
Foods high in B vitamins, calcium, and protein like almonds, whole grains, leafy greens, and lean meats.
Healthier cooking oils like olive oil, ghee
6 to 8 glasses of filtered water daily

Avoid or limit
Refined foods such as white breads, pastas, sugar etc.
Excessive intake of oily and spicy foods.
Refined white sugar and sugar-containing items like cakes, muffins, cookies etc.
Stomach irritants like coffee, alcohol, and carbonated drinks.
Overeating to prevent excessive acid production and strain on digestion.

2. Avoid excessive use of NSAIDs 
Excessive and prolonged use of NSAIDs, commonly used for pain relief, are a main culprit when it comes to gastritis. 
It is crucial to adhere to healthcare professional’s instructions when using NSAIDs, avoid long-term usage without medical supervision, and consider alternative pain management methods whenever available.

3. Reduce the risk of H. pylori infection from contaminated food and water
Practice good hand hygiene, wash hands before handling food, after using the bathroom, and after contact with potentially contaminated surfaces. 
Cook meat thoroughly, avoid cross-contamination, and promptly refrigerate perishable foods.
Drink safe, clean water and avoid consuming raw or undercooked foods.

4. Quit smoking
Smoking weakens the stomach lining and impairs healing.
Seek supportive measures like counselling, nicotine replacement therapy, and behavioral therapies for quitting.

Explore our smoking cessation range
Click Here

5. Limit or abstain from alcohol
Excessive intake of alcohol can cause irritation and inflammation of the stomach lining. It is important to avoid engaging in binge drinking. Consumption of alcohol should always be practiced in moderation. 
Men should limit their alcohol intake to a maximum of two drinks per day, while women and the elderly should not exceed one drink per day.
However, it is advisable to consider complete abstinence from alcohol, particularly if one has liver disease.

6. Manage stress effectively
Long term stress can worsen gastritis symptoms and delay healing. 
Techniques like deep breathing exercises, meditation, yoga, and mindfulness-based stress reduction can help manage stress levels and promote relaxation. 
Engaging in activities that bring joy and practicing good self-care habits can also be beneficial.

Try some relaxation techniques to manage stress and stress-induced gastritis.
Read Here
Do you know eating smaller meals can help manage gastritis?
Yes, consuming smaller, more frequent meals throughout the day can be helpful in managing gastritis. It's recommended to eat every two to four hours, avoiding skipping breakfast, and finishing the last meal at least three hours before bedtime. Develop healthy eating habits, and feel the difference!
Watch This Video
Doctor To Visit

You must consult a doctor if you experience the following symptoms especially more than twice a week or on a regular basis :
Worsening or right lower belly pain
Sudden chest pain spreading to the back, neck, shoulder, or arm
Frequent vomiting
Blood in stool or vomit
Weakness, or dizziness
Unexplained weight loss
Feverish, or worsening of symptoms or new symptoms. 

Specialists that can help manage gastritis include:
General physician
Internal medicine specialist
Gastroenterologist


A general physician may evaluate your symptoms initially, and may refer you to an internal medicine specialist or a gastroenterologist for specialized care. 

An internal medicine specialist and a gastroenterologist can help in diagnosing and treating conditions like gastritis, providing expert care for the gastrointestinal tract and associated organs. 

Consult India's best doctors online. Click here to book an appointment.
Consult Now
Treatment Of Gastritis
  The treatment of gastritis depends on the underlying cause and severity of the condition. The treatment starts with identifying the possible causes of acute gastritis, such as long-term use of NSAIDs, excessive alcohol consumption, or H. pylori infection. The following medications and supplements are usually prescribed for the management of gastritis:

A. Medications
1. Antibiotics: If an infection causes gastritis, such as H. pylori, the following antibiotics may be prescribed to eliminate the bacteria
Clarithromycin
Amoxicillin
Metronidazole 

2. Proton pump inhibitor (PPI): Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) aid in relieving the symptoms of gastritis by decreasing gastric acid production. Examples include:
Esomeprazole
Lansoprazole
Omeprazole 
Pantoprazole
Rabeprazole

Note: Doctors commonly use "triple therapy" to treat H. pylori-related gastritis and ulcers. This therapy includes a combination of a proton pump inhibitor and two antibiotics. In most cases, triple therapy will successfully eliminate the infection. If additional treatment is required, doctors usually recommend quad therapy. This involves one PPI and three different antibiotics.

4. Antacids: Antacids neutralize the acid already in your stomach. It may relieve heartburn or indigestion but will not treat an ulcer. A few antacids include:
Aluminum hydroxide 
Magnesium hydroxide 
Calcium carbonate 
Sodium bicarbonate

3. Histamine-2 (H2) blockers: H2 blockers reduce acid production. These are usually more effective than antacids in relieving symptoms, and many people find them far more convenient. 
H2 blockers include:
Cimetidine 
Ranitidine
Nizatidine 
Famotidine 

Note: Doctors may also prescribe sucralfate, which helps to coat the stomach lining and treat stomach ulcers.

Place an order for the medicines with a single click.
Buy Now

B. Nutrition and Dietary Supplements
Nutrition and diet go hand in hand with the medical management of gastritis. The following supplements may also be prescribed with digestive health:

1. Probiotics: High-quality probiotic supplements and foods like yogurt or kefir contain beneficial bacteria that can help restore the natural balance of gut flora. They may help reduce inflammation and promote a healthy stomach lining. 

Check out our prebiotics and probiotics supplement range.
Explore Here

  2. Omega-3 fatty acids: Omega-3 fatty acids have anti-inflammatory properties and can help reduce inflammation in the stomach. They are commonly found in fatty fish like salmon, mackerel, and sardines. You may also consider taking a fish oil or algae-based omega-3 supplement.

Shop our wide range of Omega and Fish oil supplements 
Fill Your Cart Now

3. Vitamin C: Vitamin C is an antioxidant that can help protect the stomach lining from oxidative damage. It also plays a role in tissue repair. Include foods rich in vitamin C in your diet, such as citrus fruits, strawberries, kiwi, and bell peppers. If needed, vitamin C supplement can also be taken.

Explore our widest range of nutritional supplements.
Buy Now
Home-care For Gastritis
  Here are some home remedies that may help alleviate symptoms of gastritis. 

Ginger (Adrak): Ginger has anti-inflammatory properties that may help reduce irritation and inflammation in the stomach. It can be consumed in different forms, such as ginger tea, ginger ale, or by adding fresh ginger to your meals.

Peppermint (Pudina): Peppermint has a soothing effect on the stomach and may help alleviate symptoms of gastritis. Drink peppermint tea or suck on peppermint candies, but be cautious if you have gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) as peppermint can worsen symptoms for some individuals.

Chamomile tea: Chamomile has anti-inflammatory and calming properties that can help ease digestive discomfort. Drink chamomile tea between meals to soothe the stomach.

Aloe vera: Aloe vera juice may help reduce inflammation and promote healing of the stomach lining. Drink a small amount of aloe vera juice (about 1/4 cup) before meals.

Garlic (Lehsun): Garlic possesses antimicrobial properties that inhibit the growth of Helicobacter pylori. Consuming raw crushed garlic is another good option to help alleviate symptoms of gastritis.

Liquorice (Mulethi): It protects your stomach lining and reduces the chances of ulcer formation or gastritis.

Cumin (Jeera) water: It has anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial properties which help reduce gastritis symptoms.

Broccoli: It has antibacterial properties and is known to help relieve gastritis symptoms.

Turmeric (Haldi): Turmeric contains a compound called Curcumin which possesses anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. It also inhibits the growth of Helicobacter pylori.

Black seed oil:  It has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties which help in reducing inflammation in the stomach and manage gastritis.

Note: Remember, these home care remedies may provide some relief but they do not replace professional medical advice. 
Complications Of Gastritis

Acute gastritis usually does not cause any serious or long-term health problems. However, if it happens frequently, is left unattended, and becomes chronic, it can lead to: 
  Peptic ulcers: Gastritis can lead to the development of open sores on the stomach lining or the upper part of the small intestine, known as peptic ulcers.

Atrophic gastritis: Chronic gastritis, including H. pylori gastritis and autoimmune gastritis, can progress to atrophic gastritis. In this condition, ongoing inflammation leads to the destruction of stomach glands responsible for producing acid and enzymes.

Iron-deficiency anemia: Chronic bleeding from the stomach due to gastritis can cause iron deficiency anemia, where there is a decrease in red blood cells or hemoglobin due to inadequate iron levels.

Vitamin B12 deficiency: Autoimmune gastritis, a type of gastritis, can lead to vitamin B12 deficiency as the immune system mistakenly attacks cells that produce intrinsic factors, a protein required for vitamin B12 absorption.

Deficiency of other vitamins and minerals: Atrophic autoimmune gastritis can lead to deficiencies in vitamins C, D, and folic acid, as well as minerals like zinc, magnesium, and calcium.

Gastric bleeding: Severe inflammation and erosions in the stomach lining can result in gastrointestinal bleeding, leading to the presence of blood in vomit or dark stools.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD): Gastritis can contribute to the development of GERD, a condition where stomach acid flows back into the esophagus, causing heartburn and other symptoms.

Gastric polyps: These are small masses of cells that form on the lining of the stomach. 
Does gastritis increase the risk of stomach cancer?
Yes, long-term, untreated gastritis, particularly caused by H. pylori infection, can increase the risk of developing stomach (gastric) cancer. Regular monitoring and appropriate treatment of gastritis can help reduce this risk. You must know some common signs and symptoms that could be suggestive of cancer.
Read Here
Alternative Therapies For Gastritis
  Here are some complementary and alternative therapies that may be beneficial for gastritis:

Acupuncture
It is a technique that involves inserting thin needles into specific points on the body. It is believed to stimulate the body's natural healing processes and improve energy flow. Some studies suggest that acupuncture may help reduce inflammation and relieve symptoms associated with gastritis. Seek a qualified acupuncturist who has experience in treating digestive disorders.
Living With Gastritis

Living with gastritis can be challenging, but with proper management and lifestyle adjustments, you can effectively cope with the condition. Here are some tips to help you live with gastritis:

Follow your healthcare provider's recommendations: It's important to work closely with your healthcare provider to develop a treatment plan that suits your specific needs. Follow their advice regarding medication usage, lifestyle modifications, and dietary recommendations.

Take prescribed medications: Your healthcare provider may prescribe medications to reduce stomach acid production, neutralize acid, or treat any underlying infection. Take these medications as directed and report any side effects or concerns to your healthcare provider.

Stay hydrated: Drink plenty of water throughout the day to keep your body hydrated and promote healthy digestion. Avoid excessive consumption of carbonated beverages, as they can increase stomach acid production and worsen symptoms.

Practice portion control: Overeating can put additional strain on your stomach and aggravate gastritis symptoms. Eat smaller portions and avoid eating late at night.

Get enough sleep: Aim for a consistent sleep schedule and ensure you're getting enough quality sleep. Sleep deprivation and irregular sleep patterns can contribute to stress and exacerbate symptoms.

Keep a symptom diary: Consider keeping a journal to track your symptoms, food triggers, and any patterns you notice. This can help you identify specific triggers and make informed decisions about your diet and lifestyle.

Reach out for support: Living with gastritis can be challenging, both physically and emotionally. Seek support from friends, family, or support groups who can provide understanding, encouragement, and advice.

Adopt a gastritis-friendly diet: Avoid foods that trigger or worsen your symptoms. 

Include food in your diet:
High-fiber food, such as whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and beans
Low-fat food, such as fish, lean meats, and vegetables
Less acidic food, such as vegetables and beans
Probiotic food, such as kombucha, yogurt etc.
Non-carbonated drinks
Caffeine-free drinks

Avoid food:
Alcohol
Caffeine
Fried food
Spicy food
Sweet and sugary food or drinks
Acidic food or drinks, such as orange juice and tomato juice
Refined carbohydrates, such as white bread and pasta
Processed meats, such as bacon, ham and hot dogs
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does gastritis take to heal?
Is it safe to practice intermittent fasting if I have gastritis?
Can gastritis lead to stomach bloating?
Is gastritis contagious?
Are gastritis and GERD the same thing?
References
InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. Gastritis: Overview. 2015 Jun 30 [Updated 2018 Jun 28]. Available from:
Azer SA, Akhondi H. Gastritis. [Updated 2022 Jul 4]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-. Available from:
Hunt RH, East JE, Lanas A, Malfertheiner P, Satsangi J, Scarpignato C, et al. Covid-19 and gastrointestinal disease: Implications for the gastroenterologist [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2021 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Cardaropoli S, Rolfo A, Todros T. Helicobacter pylori and pregnancy-related disorders [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2014 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Gastritis [Internet]. [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Safercare [Internet]. [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. Gastritis: Overview. 2015 Jun 30 [Updated 2018 Jun 28]. Available from:
Definition & Facts for Gastritis & Gastropathy - Niddk [Internet]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Symptoms of acute gastritis [Internet]. [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Vakil N. Medications for the treatment of stomach acid - digestive disorders [Internet]. MSD Manuals; 2023 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
MD(Ayu) DJVH. Gastritis causes, types, symptoms, prevention, home remedies [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Center NN& R. Naturopathy treatment can be an effective way to treat gastritis - nirvana naturopathy & retreat [Internet]. [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Articles [Internet]. [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Definition & Facts for Gastritis & Gastropathy - Niddk [Internet]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Yadav SK, Sah AK, Jha RK, Sah P, Shah DK. Turmeric (curcumin) remedies gastroprotective action [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2013 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Ayala G, Escobedo-Hinojosa WI, de la Cruz-Herrera CF, Romero I. Exploring alternative treatments for helicobacter pylori infection [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2014 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
MD(Ayu) DJVH. Gastritis causes, types, symptoms, prevention, home remedies [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2023 May 18]. Available from:
Yamamoto S, Watabe K, Takehara T. Is obesity a new risk factor for gastritis? [Internet]. S. Karger AG; 2012 [cited 2023 Jul 3]. Available from:
Rugge M, Sugano K, Sacchi D, Sbaraglia M, Malfertheiner P. Gastritis: An update in 2020 - current treatment options in gastroenterology [Internet]. Springer US; 2020 [cited 2023 Jul 3]. Available from:
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.