Polio
Also known as Poliomyelitis
Overview

Polio is a highly infectious disease caused by polioviruses. It is transmitted only from person to person through the fecal-oral route or, less frequently, by contaminated water or food.

Signs and symptoms of polio range from no symptoms to limb deformities, paralysis, and even death.
Not receiving the polio vaccine, weak immunity, and travel to areas endemic to the disease are the main risk factors for getting infected with poliovirus.

Diagnosis of polio is based on the patient's history, physical exam, and symptoms. The virus may be isolated from the patient's throat, feces, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)  to confirm the diagnosis.
There is no cure for polio. Treatment of polio is mainly supportive and focuses on limiting and alleviating symptoms.

For most patients, the prognosis is good because there are few or no symptoms; however, the prognosis is severely limited if the patient develops more severe symptoms such as limb deformity, paralysis, difficulty breathing, and inability to swallow foods.

Polio can only be prevented by immunization. The vaccine, given multiple times, can protect a child for life. Due to the launch of a few initiatives like Global Polio Eradication, more than 18 million people who would otherwise have been paralyzed can walk today. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children under 5 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women, but more common in men.
Body part(s) involved
Brain 
Spinal cord
Prevalence
World: 6 (2021)
India: 1 (2011)
Mimicking Conditions
Flu-like symptoms 
Acute flaccid myelitis
Guillain-Barre syndrome
Necessary health tests/imaging
Virus isolation and detection 
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis 
Electromyogram (EMG) 
Blood tests
Treatment
No cure. Only supportive treatment:
Pain relief medications:  aspirin, paracetamol or ibuprofen, gabapentin 
Physical or occupational therapy 
Mobility aids
See All
Symptoms Of Polio 

The effects range from asymptomatic (most common) to the most severe forms of debilitating paralysis. Various symptoms are discussed below:

1. Non-Paralytic Polio
About 95% of people who get infected with polio won't have any symptoms. They are able to fight off the infection without even realizing they are infected. 
In approximately a few cases, 4%–8% of polio infections result in a minor illness without any evidence of central nervous system invasion. This is known as abortive poliomyelitis. Complete recovery usually occurs in less than a week.
Few people experience a flu-like illness for 3 to 21 days after they are infected. The symptoms observed in this type of infection are: 
High temperature (fever) of 100.4F or above
Headache
Abdominal pain
Sore throat 
Gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea and vomiting)

2. Paralytic Polio 
Around 1 percent of cases can lead to paralytic polio. Paralytic polio causes paralysis of the spinal cord, brainstem, or both. The early symptoms are related to nonparalytic polio. But after a week, severe symptoms appear like 
Muscle weakness 
Tight joints (contractures)
Shrinking of the muscles (atrophy)
Deformities, such as twisted hips, feet, or legs
Loss of reflexes 
Sudden paralysis (temporary or permanent)
Many people with paralytic poliomyelitis recover completely, and muscle function returns to some degree in several cases. 

3. Post-Polio syndrome (PPS)
Polio can return even after 15 to 40 years of recovery. Some common symptoms of Post Polio syndrome include
Easily exhausted or fatigued
Low tolerance to cold temperatures
Worse muscle pain
Muscle atrophy
Trouble with concentration and memory

It has been estimated that 25-50 percent of people who survive polio will get PPS. 
Causes Of Polio 

Polio is a highly infectious disease caused by the poliovirus.
Poliovirus only infects people. An infected individual can spread the virus to others before or up to 2 weeks after symptoms appear. An asymptomatic carrier can also infect others.
The poliovirus can survive in an infected person's intestines for many weeks. This can lead to the contamination of food and water in an unclean environment. Transmission can occur in the following ways:
Contact with the feces of an infected person
Droplets from a sneeze or cough of an infected person
Touching contaminated surfaces.
Close contact with an infected person.
Risk Factors For Polio 

Polio tends to affect the most vulnerable members of the population. This includes pregnant, young children, and those with weakened immune systems. 
Various risk factors for contracting the infection are as follows:
Not vaccinated against polio
Travel to countries where polio is widespread or endemic, like Pakistan or Afghanistan. 
A weakened immune system
Tonsillectomy or having tonsils removed
Handling of a laboratory specimen of the virus
Diagnosis Of Polio 

A general practitioner diagnoses polio by a detailed medical history, performing a physical exam, and testing samples of body fluids.
Medical history 
This includes taking information like any travel to an area where polio is endemic or any contact with a person infected with polio.
Physical examination 
This involves a complete body check-up. The function of respiratory muscles is examined as polio affects the spinal cord and the brain stem, which may infect the respiratory muscles. The muscle reflexes are also evaluated as there may be stiff neck and back muscles or difficulty lifting the head or legs while lying flat on the back.
Laboratory diagnosis 
The following tests help in the diagnosis and confirmation of polio infection:  
Virus isolation and detection 
Virus isolation in culture is the most reliable method for diagnosing poliovirus infection. Poliovirus is usually isolated from stool specimens or throat swabs. Two samples are collected at least 24 hours apart from patients with suspected poliomyelitis to increase the chances of isolating poliovirus.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis 
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can also be used for diagnostic testing of the virus. CSF is collected using a lumbar puncture (also called a spinal tap), in which a needle is inserted into the spinal canal to collect CSF.
Blood tests 
Blood is tested for antibodies for poliovirus, produced by the body in defense against an invading virus or bacteria.
Electromyogram (EMG) 
EMG measures electrical activity in response to a nerve's muscle stimulation. This test is used to help detect any neuromuscular abnormalities and differential diagnosis of muscle weakness in post-polio syndrome.
Fingerprinting the polio virus 
Poliovirus is isolated and tested by a particular test called oligonucleotide mapping (fingerprinting) or genomic sequencing. This test helps look at the virus's genetic sequence to screen if the virus's origin is wild-type or vaccine-like. Wild-type viruses naturally occur in the environment, whereas a vaccine-like virus is derived after a spontaneous mutation of the virus's genes. 

Book your tests from the comfort and safety of your home.
Click Here


Celebs affected
Frida Kahlo
Renowned artist Frida Kahlo contracted polio at the age of 6 years. She had to spend months in bed recovering from the disease. Although she was not paralyzed, her right leg was left noticeably shorter and thinner than her left one. Ulcers developed on her foot in the years that followed.
Joni Mitchell
Joni Mitchell, a Canadian-American musician, producer, and painter, contracted polio at the age of 9 years in the early 1950s. Her spine got twisted, and she couldn't walk and be paralyzed. After 40 years, she suffered from a resurgence of her symptoms in the year 1995. She started feeling extreme fatigue and muscle weakness for the second time.
Specialist To Visit

There's currently no cure for polio, so treatment focuses on managing symptoms and improving the quality of life. A team often treats patients with different healthcare professionals. This is called a multidisciplinary team (MDT) of doctors.
The multidisciplinary team of doctors includes
General physician: Diagnoses polio by taking a detailed medical history, performing a physical exam, and advising necessary diagnostic tests.
Neurologists: Specialize in the treatment of problems affecting the nervous system. 
Mobility specialist: Advice about mobility aids, such as walking sticks and wheelchairs.
Physiotherapist: Help patients improve their range of movement and coordination
Respiratory consultant: Deal with problems affecting breathing
Rehabilitation consultant: A specialist in managing complex disabilities


Get a consultation from our team of non-judgemental and trusted doctors. 
Book A Consultation Now

Prevention Of Polio 

There is currently no treatment for polio. However, it is a vaccine-preventable disease. 
Vaccination is usually done in childhood. If you are not vaccinated as a child, ask your healthcare provider about your vaccination. 
A healthcare professional will recommend four polio shots in childhood:

First shot at 2 months
Second shot at 4 months
Third shot between 6 and 18 months
Booster shot between 4 and 6 years

If a person is not vaccinated in childhood and is recommended to get vaccinated as an adult, that person will get three shots:

Two doses 1-2 months apart
A third dose is 6-12 months after the second

There are two types of vaccines: 
Inactivated polio vaccine (IPV): The IPV contains poliovirus that is treated ("killed") so that it cannot multiply anymore. It has an inactive version of polio strains types 1, 2, and 3. IPV is administered as a series of shots (injections). 
Oral polio vaccine (OPV): This is also known as the live attenuated polio vaccine. It uses a live virus that has been weakened (attenuated) and cannot make you sick. However, it creates an immune response in the intestines called mucosal immunity, which protects from polio infection. It is given in a liquid form orally.
 Did you know?
April 24th – April 30th (The last week of April) is observed as World Immunization Week every year. The aim is to promote vaccines across all age groups to protect against diseases.
Read Now 
Treatment Of Polio 

There is no cure for polio. The management of this condition focuses on increasing comfort, speedy recovery, and preventing complications. Supportive treatments include:
Pain relief medications
Over-the-counter medication such as aspirin, paracetamol, or ibuprofen, and stronger NSAIDs and opiates can be prescribed by the doctor to help relieve pain. But these medications should not be taken for a long time as they can cause side effects, such as stomach ulcers. If these medications don't work, the physician may prescribe medicines like gabapentin for pain.
Rest and exercise 
Staying active is beneficial for most people with post-polio syndrome, as it may slow down progressive muscle weakness. However, patients may find it challenging to stay active as symptoms may worsen over some time. 
To overcome this issue, "pacing" techniques may be recommended. This involves
Prioritizing tasks 
Taking regular breaks and rest during the day
Doing regular gentle exercise 
Physical or occupational therapy 
Physical therapy aims to ease pain and helps to function, move, and live better. This can help alleviate arm or leg weakness caused by polio and improve long-term outcomes, primarily if implemented early in the illness. 
Mobility aids 
Mobility aids are designed to assist in walking or improve the mobility of people with a mobility impairment. These include
Wheelchairs
Walking sticks 
Braces to support weakened muscles or joints
Shoe inserts 
The physical deformities with polio tend to affect the extremities and limbs. The physical effects of polio can lead to changes in gait and bone structure, and shoe inserts help move around without causing pain. 
Using cold and heat compression 
Alternate applications of heat and cold can help to relieve muscle pain and tension.
Managing the psychological impact 
PPS can lead to a significant psychological impact as it can trigger anxiety, isolation, stress, and depression. Therefore, managing the symptoms and improving the quality of life is essential. 
Healthy eating and managing weight 
Being overweight can further strain weakened muscles and hurt energy levels and general health. A well-balanced and nutritious diet will help control weight and improve your overall health. 
  Here are a few practical weight loss tips.
Click To Read
Complications Of Polio 

The most significant complications of polio infection include paralysis, fatal respiratory and cardiovascular collapse, and Post-polio syndrome (PPS). 
It has been estimated that up to 30 to 40% of the 15 to 20 million known polio survivors worldwide develop some form of PPS. It has been characterized by new-onset or progressive muscle weakness in a patient previously diagnosed with poliomyelitis.
The other symptoms include myalgias, respiratory distress, joint pain, atrophy, dysphagia, and generalized fatigue.
Paralysis can often cause problems with breathing, swallowing, and bowel and bladder functioning. 
Alternative Therapies of Polio

Massage Therapy
Massage under medical supervision can help a great deal to relieve muscle aches and pains. Targeting the right muscle areas for a perfect massage to relieve the symptoms is imperative. Applying herbal oils can also help enhance the effects of a massage and add to the relaxing effect.
Hydrotherapy 
Hydrotherapy can do wonders for polio survivors due to reduced gravity and buoyancy,  especially when the body is undergoing a lot of strain. A few hours in a swimming pool or tub for sore and aching joints relieve the muscles.
Living With Polio 

Polio can have various adverse effects on the patient's lifestyle, depending on the severity of the symptoms. The challenge or ease of living with polio varies for each survivor, subject to the availability of medical care and rehabilitation opportunities and their family and social support. Various forms of rehabilitation and support include:
Polio patients often require assistive devices for movements, such as braces, canes, orthotics, and wheelchairs, so they can individually also take care of the daily chores of life. 
Physical or occupational therapy can also help ease pain and enable them to function, move, and live better.
Emotional and caretaking are also required by the person dealing with polio. As this ailment can also lead to lifelong impairment, a helping hand or support from the family on the emotional ground can do wonders in recovery. 
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does polio last?
At what age does polio affect?
Is polio temporary or permanent?
Can polio come back?
Does polio cause pain?
Where was polio most common?
Which part of the body does polio affect?
References
Wolbert JG, Higginbotham K. Poliomyelitis. [Updated 2022 Jun 21]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-.
Diagnosis. Post Polio Syndrome. National Health Service (NHS). 5 july 2022.
Overview. Poliomyelitis (polio). 4 July 2022.
India Polio Factsheet.
Poliomyelitis: For Healthcare Providers. August 10, 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
MILLS M. Possible home care in poliomyelitis. Calif Med. 1952 Jul;77(1):29-31.
Global immunization. Diagnostic Methods.September 28, 2021.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Mehndiratta MM, Mehndiratta P, Pande R. Poliomyelitis: historical facts, epidemiology, and current challenges in eradication. Neurohospitalist. 2014 Oct;4.
Polio Disease and Poliovirus. July 12, 2022.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Introduction.Poliomyelitis. National Health Portal. Sep 16, 2015.
Wolbert JG, Higginbotham K. Poliomyelitis. 2022 Jun 21. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Minor PD. An Introduction to Poliovirus: Pathogenesis, Vaccination, and the Endgame for Global Eradication. Methods Mol Biol. 2016.
Nomoto A. Molecular aspects of poliovirus pathogenesis. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2007 Dec;83(8):266-75.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.