Myocarditis
Also known as Inflammatory cardiomyopathy, Idiopathic myocarditis, and Viral cardiomyopathy
Overview
Myocarditis is a medical condition in which the myocardium, a heart muscle, gets inflamed. It is a rare cardiovascular disease that enlarges the heart, degenerates the heart muscle cells, and develops scar tissues. These factors force the heart to work harder to supply blood and oxygen all over the body. Generally, people relate heart conditions to old age. However, myocarditis is likely to affect anyone, regardless of age. In fact, the high-risk population includes young adults.

A wide range of possible agents like viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites, autoimmune responses, and certain medications can trigger this disease. Some of the common symptoms of myocarditis include chest pain, irregular or rapid heartbeat, difficulty breathing, accumulation of fluid with swelling in lower extremities, fever, fatigue, etc. 

In most cases myocarditis improves on its own without treatment and with complete recovery. Sometimes, treatment of the underlying cause like bacterial infections by antibiotics can lead to full recovery. Consequently, the diagnosis of the underlying cause of myocarditis can help in best possible treatment. However, individuals with more prolonged or severe cases of myocarditis may need more specific medications or even hospitalization.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Heart
Prevalence
Worldwide:10.2 to 105.6 per 100,000 (2021)
Mimicking Conditions
Acute myocarditis: Pericarditis, Acute coronary syndrome, Coronary artery disease, Coronary vasospasm, Myocardial ischemia/infarction, Pulmonary edema, Unstable angina, Congestive heart failure & Pericardial effusion
Viral myocarditis: Carnitine deficiency, Coarctation of the aorta, Coronary artery anomalies, Cardiac tumor, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Endocardial fibroelastosis, Enetroviral infections, Genetics of Von Gierke, Genetics of glycogen-storage disease type II, Medial necrosis of coronary arteries, Non viral myocarditis, Shock, Valvular aortic steniosis & Viral pericarditis. 
Treatment
Antibiotics
Corticosteroids: Cyclosporine & Prednisone
Heart failure therapy: Enalapril (ACE inhibitor), Lisinopril (ACE inhibitor) & Metoprolol (Beta-blocker)
Antiviral drugs: Ribavirin or interferons
IVIG (intravenous immunoglobulin)
Heart transplant


Specialists to consult
Cardiologists
Cardiothoracic surgeons
Symptoms Of Myocarditis

People with myocarditis may not show any noticeable symptoms initially. Some of the common myocarditis symptoms include:
Symptoms in adults

1. Pain or discomfort in the chest
Chest pain in people with myocarditis may resemble the chest pain that occurs during a heart attack. It may last for a couple of minutes and make you experience an uncomfortable fullness and pressure in your chest.

2. Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
A healthy adult, weighing around 70 kgs breathes at a rate of 14 breaths/minute when at rest. If this breathing pattern increases and hyperventilation (rapid breathing) occurs, one may experience shortness of breath or dyspnea. It may make one gasp for air.

3. Edema or swelling
Noticeable swelling in various parts of the body, including ankles, legs, and feet may be seen. It is due to fluid buildup and is often followed by fatigue.

4. Palpitations or abnormal heartbeat
An irregularity in the heartbeat might feel as if the heart is racing or has skipped a beat. Palpitations can also feel as if the chest is fluttering. In many cases, the abnormal heartbeat may also lead to fullness in the chest and shortness of breath.

5. Infection-related fever
If the myocardium has inflamed due to an infection, one may feel feverish and experience chills.

6. Other flu-like symptoms
Flu-like symptoms such as sore throat, headache, body aches, and joint pain can also be experienced in myocarditis.
Symptoms in children or infants

The symptoms of myocarditis are more nonspecific in infants and children. These include:
Poor appetite
Abdominal pain
Malaise
Chronic cough
Rashes
Fever
Diarrhea
Sore throat
Difficulty breathing
Pain in the joint
Did you know?
Patients with severe COVID-19, may present with new-onset heart failure in the absence of a history of cardiovascular disease. They can show symptoms like cough, fever, dyspnea, chest pain, and palpitations. However, these symptoms may be due to COVID-19 itself and not myocarditis. Therefore, these patients may have a silent presentation of COVID-19 myocarditis. Get all your FAQs answered on COVID-19.
Read Now!
Causes Of Myocarditis

Myocarditis is a rare health condition. However, in most cases, an infection (bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic) in the body can cause myocardial infarction. The causes are discussed below:
1. Viruses
Viral infections are among the most prevalent causes of myocarditis (viral myocarditis). These include influenza virus, adenovirus, COVID 19 and Coxsackie B virus, to name a few. Viruses are likely to infect the tissue of the heart muscle. It may lead to immune response (acute to chronic) from the body.
2. Bacterias
The bacteria that may cause inflammation of the myocardium to include corynebacterium, meningococci, Streptococci, clostridia, etc. 
3. Fungi
Although rare, fungal myocarditis can occur due to infections caused by various fungi including candida, aspergillus, and histoplasma.
4. Parasites
Some parasites may directly or indirectly affect various structures of the heart, with infections manifested as myocarditis. Some of these parasites include Trypanosoma cruzi, Toxoplasma, and Trichinella. Chagas' disease is by far the most important parasitic infection of the heart.
5. Hypersensitivity or toxic reaction
Toxic myocarditis may be triggered by numerous drugs such as 
Dobutamine
Phenytoin
Antibiotics like:
Ampicillin
Azithromycin
Cephalosporins
Tetracyclines
Psychiatric medications like:
Tricyclic antidepressants
Benzodiazepines
Clozapine
Recreational/illicit drugs like
Methamphetamine
Cocaine

Other agents include:
Heavy metals (copper, lead and arsenicals)
Antineoplastic agents (e.g., anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil and tyrosine kinase inhibitors).
6. Autoimmunity
When the immune system makes a mistake and attacks the body's own tissues or organs it is known as autoimmunity. Autoimmunity can be the main factor sustaining inflammation and disease progression in myocarditis. Pathogens, such as viruses, can initiate autoimmune mechanisms that lead to myocarditis.

Autoimmune disorders like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis can also lead to myocarditis.

Studies have shown that 50% of individuals with RA show cardiac involvement. To read more about RA.
Click Here!
7. Idiopathic myocarditis
When inflammation of the heart muscle develops without any identified cause, it is called an idiopathic condition.
Did you know!
70% of urban Indians are at risk of heart diseases. Know why young Indians are developing heart disorders.
Click To Know!
Risk Factors for Myocarditis

The risk factors for myocarditis include the following:
1. Age 
Although myocarditis can affect all ages, it mostly occurs in young adults.
2. Gender
Men are often more prone to developing myocarditis than women. This is true except when the inflammation is caused by autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, which are more common in women.

Know the 4 major risk factors leading to heart disease in women.
Tap Now!

3. Family history and genetics
Genetics may be partly responsible for developing myocarditis and how the body responds to infection and inflammation.

Certain rare inherited conditions can affect how the body controls inflammation. For example, familial Mediterranean fever or tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) can increase the risk of developing myocarditis.
4. Medical conditions
Certain medical conditions can increase the risk of developing myocarditis:
Diabetes
HIV/AIDS
COVID 19 
Eating disorders such as anorexia
Skin injuries caused by burns or infections
5. Lifestyle choices
Excessive consumption of alcohol
Use cocaine, amphetamines, or intravenous recreational drugs
6. Environment
Chagas disease, common in Central and South America, can cause acute and chronic myocarditis. It is caused by a parasite that is spread by certain types of insects. 
7. Other causes
Some of these medical problems that can put you at a higher risk of getting myocarditis include:
Poor dental health
Chest injury
End-stage kidney disease

Know 7 risk factors causing heart diseases and ways to manage them.
Click Here!
Diagnosis Of Myocarditis

After a physical checkup and evaluation of medical history, the doctor may recommend the following tests to confirm the diagnosis:
Blood tests

Creatine kinase (CK): It is a blood test that checks the level of CK in the blood. If it is more than the normal range, it might indicate an infection in the myocardium.

Total leukocyte count: Abnormal WBC (white blood cells) count can be helpful in diagnosing myocarditis due to infections.

CRP: Increased levels of CRP (C-reactive protein) act as an inflammatory marker.

ESR: Elevated ESR (Erythrocyte Sedimentation rate) is also another marker for inflammation in the body.

Troponin levels: Increased level of troponin (circulating) in the blood indicates damage to the heart muscle.
Imaging tests

Electrocardiography: Electrocardiogram is performed to detect the electrical activity of the heart. 

Chest X-ray: A chest X-ray may help to check for enlargement of the heart or accumulation of fluid in the heart's sac.

Echocardiography: It is a vital component in myocarditis diagnosis. It uses high-pitched sound waves to produce a picture of your heart. It also helps with blood flow analysis and analysis of any valve problems, heart enlargement, and the presence of a clot within or around the heart.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): A cardiac MRI uses radio waves and a magnetic field to show the size, shape, as well as swelling, inflammation, or scarring of the heart.
Biopsy
Cardiac Catheterization is performed by threading a tiny tube through a vein, into the heart to take measurements or collect a biopsy sample to check for inflammation or infection. Biopsy is not routinely performed and is suggested in special cases of:
Severe arrhythmia
Conventional supportive therapy that did not work
Suspected acute dilated cardiomyopathy (A heart condition that is caused due to blockage in the coronary arteries).
Micro-RNA profiling
This test is done to detect acute and chronic myocarditis. It also helps in identifying the severity of myocardial damage. 

Make sure to get the right diagnosis with reliable medical tests. Book a test.
Book Now!
 Prevention Of Myocarditis


Although there is no specific preventive measure to practice, one may follow the below tips to minimize the risks of getting infected:
1. Avoid exposure to germs
Make sure to avoid people with flu-like symptoms. Similarly, if you have a viral infection, try not to expose others.
2. Practice hand hygiene
Following hygienic practices, such as washing hands every time before and after eating, or using the toilet is always a good idea. Washing cuts or scrapes right away can also help to prevent any infection.
3. Dental care
Brush and floss your teeth every day. Visit the dentist regularly for timely diagnosis and treatment of any dental issues.
4. Practice safe sex
Safe sex practices can prevent an HIV infection. This condition weakens the immune system and  makes one more susceptible to develop myocarditis.
5. Avoid use of illegal drugs
As myocarditis is likely to affect people with a compromised immune system, it is advisable to avoid any illegal drugs.
6. Avoid exposure to ticks
Make sure to wear long pants and cover hands if you live in a tick-infested region. You may also use tick repellents containing DEET (N, N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide).
7. Get vaccinated
Make sure to get vaccinated to prevent COVID-19, influenza, rubella, measles, mumps, and poliomyelitis. 

Get all your queries answered about COVID 19 vaccination. 
Click Now!

“Take care of your heart and don’t let it fall apart” 

It is of utmost importance for all of us to take care of your heart health. Read simple ways to prevent heart diseases!
Click Here!
Specialist To Visit

Always remember, that the symptoms of myocarditis are familiar to that of a heart attack. Make sure to get in touch with your doctor if you experience any of the signs of myocarditis, especially shortness of breath and chest pain. Severe symptoms may require hospitalization.

Specialists that can help diagnose and treat myocarditis include:
Cardiologists
Cardiothoracic surgeons

Consult India’s best doctors online.
Click Here!
Did you know how many people died of cardiomyopathy (a heart muscle disease), including myocarditis worldwide?
Nearly 400,000 people lost their lives due to cardiomyopathy, including myocarditis, in the year 2010, worldwide. This statistic includes 160,000 and 240,000 women and men, respectively. Therefore, it is highly advisable to get in touch with your doctor if you experience any of the symptoms of myocarditis. 
Treatment Of Myocarditis

Myocarditis treatment options differ from person to person, depending on the underlying causes and seriousness of the condition. The following treatment protocols are used for managing myocarditis:
1. Antibiotics
If myocarditis is due to an underlying cause, like a bacterial infection, the doctor may prescribe antibiotics. However, people with severe and prolonged illness due to myocarditis are likely to need specific medicines and sometimes hospitalization. 
2. Corticosteroids 
Sometimes autoimmune conditions like lupus may also cause myocarditis. In such cases, doctors may prescribe corticosteroids to minimize the immune response of your body. Some medications may include:
Ciclosporin
Prednisone
3. Medications for heart failure
The doctor is likely to prescribe diuretics, beta-blockers, and ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)-inhibitors to minimize edema and the workload on the heart. These may include the following:
Enalapril (ACE inhibitor)
Lisinopril (ACE inhibitor)
Metoprolol (Beta-blocker)
Furosemide (Diuretic)
Captopril (ACE inhibitor)
Ramipril (ACE inhibitor)
Carvedilol (Beta-blocker)
4. Antiviral drugs
Antiviral therapy with ribavirin or interferons in viral myocarditis can help to prevent onset of cardiomyopathy, reduce the severity of the disease, and decrease mortality.

If the symptoms are severe and medications are not working the way they should, more proactive treatment options might be tried. These include the following:

1. IVIG (Intravenous immunoglobulin)
To make sure the body's inflammatory and immune responses are under check, the doctor may recommend intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). 

2. VAD (ventricular assist device)
It is a mechanical device that is used to pump an adequate amount of blood from the ventricles (lower chambers) of the heart to the other parts of the body. 

3. Intra-aortic balloon pump
Intra-aortic balloon pump, also known as IABP, is a therapeutic device. It allows the heart to pump more blood and reduce its load.

4. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
ECMO is a respiratory or cardiac support machine. It allows the lungs and heart to function normally. 

5. Heart transplant
In case of severe conditions and if the other myocarditis treatment did not work, the doctor is likely to suggest heart transplantation surgery.

Prevention of a disease  is always better than cure. There are certain habits that can cause harm to the heart. Understand what they are and to avoid them effectively. 
Read This!


Home-care For Myocarditis

Myocarditis is marked by inflammation of the heart. Here are some home care tips if one has been diagnosed with myocarditis:
1. Take adequate rest
Rest and reducing the strain on the heart is an important part of myocarditis recovery. If you have or had myocarditis, ask your health care provider which type and amount of physical activity are safe for you. If you have myocarditis, you should avoid competitive sports for at least 3 to 6 months.
2. Eat a heart-friendly diet
Foods that are good for your heart include green leafy vegetables, fruits, nuts, whole grains & low-fat dairy products. Try to limit the consumption of trans fat, salt, saturated fats, cholesterol, red meat, and sugary foods. Have an anti-inflammatory diet that focuses on fresh produce, including fruits, vegetables, and nuts. 

Read more about foods that can keep your heart healthy. 
Tap To Know!

3. Avoid stress
Stress can increase blood pressure, hence it is important to manage it effectively. Yoga, meditation and deep breathing exercises are effective in managing stress.

Find out how yoga can keep your heart healthy.
Read To Know!
4. Limit fluid intake
Do not drink more than 1.5 liters or 6 cups of fluid every day. Fluids include water, juice, soup, tea, coffee, and even some fruits like watermelons. Maintain a fluid balance chart to track the quantity of fluid consumption.
5. Maintain a healthy weight
Obesity directly increases the risk of complications due to myocarditis. A healthy weight can go a long way in keeping the heart healthy.
6. Reduce alcohol intake
Drinking excessive alcohol can increase the levels of certain fats known as triglycerides in the blood and might harm the immune system. Thus, it is important to keep alcohol intake to a minimum.
7. Quit smoking
Smoking is known to increase heart rate and blood pressure, so it is important to quit smoking in order to improve the symptoms of myocarditis. 

Explore our smoking cessation range that can help you quit smoking.
Visit Now!

8. Stay physically active
Supervised moderate exercise is an integral part of a healthy heart regimen. Consult your doctor to understand the range of physical activities you can do.

Know more about 6 amazing benefits of aerobics.
Read This!
Complications Of Myocarditis

Timely treatment of myocarditis has a good prognosis without having any long-term complications. However, severe cases may have some permanent complications related to heart muscles. These include the following:
1. Heart failure
Myocarditis, if left untreated, is likely to damage the heart muscles, making it inefficient to work properly. It may also lead to heart failure.
2. Stroke or heart attack
If the heart is unable to pump an adequate amount of blood, there is a risk of blood clot formation in the heart. If a blood clot creates a blockage in an artery of the heart, one may suffer a heart attack. Also, if the clot travels to the brain it can cause a stroke.
3. Arrhythmia
When the heart muscles are injured or become weak, it may lead to arrhythmia or irregular heart rhythm.
4. Ventricular dysrhythmias
These are abnormal heart rhythms that make the lower chambers of the heart twitch instead
pump. This can limit or stop the heart from supplying blood to the body. 
5. Left ventricular aneurysm
It forms when a section of the heart muscle in the left ventricle (the chamber of the heart that pumps blood to the body) stretches and becomes very thin. 
6. Dilated cardiomyopathy
It is a type of heart muscle disease that causes the heart chambers (ventricles) to thin and stretch, growing larger.
7. Cardiogenic shock
This is a life-threatening condition in which your heart suddenly can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. 
8. Sudden cardiac death or SCD
It is a life-threatening complication in which the heart may stop beating due to severe arrhythmia.

Myocarditis is often related to an increased possibility of SCD (sudden cardiac death) in young people. The number of myocarditis-related SCD ranges from 1% to 14% in the younger population. Know why sudden cardiac arrests happens. 
Read This!
Alternative Treatment For Myocarditis

There are various alternative treatment modalities that can help in management of myocarditis or factors affecting it, like stress. However, it is always advised to consult your healthcare provider before starting any herbal medication:
1. Chinese herbal medicine
Astragalus membranaceus: Astragalus membranaceus is a medicinal herb widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. In light of myocarditis, it helps to improve cardiac function and manage arrhythmia.
Salvia miltiorrhiza: Commonly known as red or Chinese sage, Salvia miltiorrhiza holds a special place in traditional Chinese medicine. According to various studies, a shot (injection) of this medicinal plan showed a noticeable decrease in arrhythmia. It also helps to reduce LDH (Lactate dehydrogenase) levels.
Shenmai injection (SMI): It is also a Chinese medicine that helps improve cardiac function significantly.
Hawthorn extract: Hawthorn is a shrub native to North America, Western Asia, Europe, and North Africa. Studies opine that the leaves of the hawthorn plant can considerably reduce the symptoms of minor heart failure, including fatigue and breathlessness.

There are certain Indian herbs and spices that are good for your heart health. 
Read To Know!

2. Yoga
There are plenty of benefits of yoga supported by scientific evidence. Some of the yogasanas you may perform for stress relief include Savasana, Balasana, Viparita Karani, and Marjaryasana to Bitilasana.
3. Meditation
It is indeed an effective tool for stress management. If you are trying it for the first time, you might find it hard to focus. In such a situation, guided meditation audio may help.

Meditation can do wonders for your body and soul!
Read More!

4. Breathing exercises
The next time you feel stressed out, try deep breathing exercises. These will help you calm down and relax your senses so that you may get relief from stress. Some deep breathing techniques you may try include belly breathing, box breathing, alternate-nostril breathing, lion breathing, and 4-7-8 breathing, to mention a few.

Read more about deep breathing exercises.
Click Here!

 Living With Myocarditis

In some people with myocarditis, no symptoms show up. Some do not even know if they have the condition. In most such cases, the symptoms resolve on their own. Many people who have had treatment for myocarditis live their usual life span like normal individuals sans any complications.

Some people may require treatment in the form of medications, while some might need heart surgery. Besides medications and alternative therapies, a healthy lifestyle may also help your heart work well. Here are some tips that can help you improve heart conditions like myocarditis more effectively:

Reduce the amount of sodium in diet ( less than 1,500 milligrams a day)
Keep a watch on daily fluid intake and weight
Maintain a healthy weight
Eat wholesome and well balanced diet
Quit smoking
Limit alcohol intake
Avoid strenuous exercises and competitive sports
Prefer light physical activity
Avoid stress
Track your symptoms
Monitor blood pressure regularly
Follow proper medication regimen
Ensure regular follow-up with the cardiologist
Get vaccinated as flu and pneumonia pose a greater danger to people with heart conditions.
Your heart health is the key to overall good health! Read tips from cardiologists to keep your heart healthy. 
Tap Here!

Endocarditis Vs. Myocarditis Vs. Pericarditis
  Endocarditis
Endocarditis is a heart condition where inflammation develops in the endocardium of the heart. The endocardium is the inner lining of the valves and chambers of the heart. It is an uncommon health condition and can be fatal if left untreated. 

Myocarditis
Myocarditis is also a rare disease in which the myocardium (a heart muscle) swells. This condition is likely to affect a little or large portion of the myocardium. It makes your heart work harder to pump blood and carry it to the rest of the body. It may also lead to heart failure and stroke.

Pericarditis
It is another type of heart inflammation that affects the pericardium, the membrane that covers the heart. The pericardium ensures that your heart is in position in the thoracic girdle while protecting it from infections. The pericardium comprises two thin sheaths of tissue with a small amount of fluid in it. It reduces the friction between the layers when your heart pumps.
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does it likely to heal after myocarditis?
Are people with myocarditis allowed to fly?
Is myocarditis curable?
Can diet help reduce inflammation in the heart? What should you eat?
Do the symptoms of myocarditis recur?
Myocarditis can lead to sudden death. Who is at risk?
Is testosterone level in men associated with myocarditis? How?
Can the mRNA COVID-19 vaccine lead to myocarditis?
References
Myocarditis Foundation. Understanding myocarditis [Internet]. Myocarditis Foundation. Myocarditis Foundation; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].
Myocarditis [Internet]. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). 2015 [cited 2021Nov3].
Ali et al. COVID-19 and myocarditis: a review of literature. The Egyptian Heart Journal (2022) 74:23.
Lynge TH, Nielsen TS, Gregers Winkel B, Tfelt-Hansen J, Banner J. Sudden cardiac death caused by myocarditis in persons aged 1-49 years: A nationwide study of 14294 deaths in Denmark [Internet]. Forensic sciences research. Taylor & Francis; 2019 [cited 2021Nov3].
Gabriel Fung, Honglin Luo, et al. Myocarditis. Circulation Research February 5, 2016.
Peretto G, Sala S, Rizzo S, et al. Arrhythmias in myocarditis: State of the art. Heart Rhythm. 2019;16(5):793-801.
Heart inflammation [Internet]. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2021Nov3].
Al-Akchar M. Acute myocarditis [Internet]. StatPearls [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].
Fadoua Mouedder et al. Rheumatoid arthritis, a rare cause of acute myocarditis: a case report. PAMJ Clinical Medicine. 2020;4(115).
Schultz JC, Hilliard AA, Cooper LT, Rihal CS. Diagnosis and treatment of viral myocarditis [Internet]. Mayo Clinic proceedings. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; 2009 [cited 2021Nov3].
Oktay AA, Aktürk HK, Paul TK, et al. Diabetes, Cardiomyopathy, and Heart Failure. [Updated 2020 Aug 1]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al., editors. Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000.
Golpour, A.; Patriki, D.; Hanson, P.J.; McManus, B.; Heidecker, B. Epidemiological Impact of Myocarditis. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10.
Barbaro G. HIV-associated cardiomyopathy etiopathogenesis and clinical aspects. Herz. 2005;30(6):486-492.
Kang M, An J. Viral Myocarditis. [Updated 2022 Jan 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Tschöpe C, Carsten Tschöpe From the Charité, Cooper LT, Leslie T. Cooper Correspondence to Leslie T. Cooper, Torre-Amione G, Guillermo Torre-Amione Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center, et al. Management of myocarditis-related cardiomyopathy in adults [Internet]. Circulation Research. 2019 [cited 2021Nov3].
XM; LJPYMD. Herbal medicines for viral myocarditis [Internet]. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2021Nov3].
Giant cell myocarditis [Internet]. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). 2018 [cited 2021Nov3].
Barbiellini Amidei C, Fayosse A, Dumurgier J, Machado-Fragua MD, Tabak AG, van Sloten T, et al. Association between age at diabetes onset and subsequent risk of dementia [Internet]. JAMA. American Medical Association; 2021 [cited 2021Nov3].
Al-Akchar M, Kiel J. Acute Myocarditis. [Updated 2022 May 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.