Vaginal yeast infection
Also known as Vaginal thrush, Vaginal candidiasis, Vulvovaginal candidiasis, Candidal vaginitis and Genital candidiasis
Overview
Vaginal yeast infection is a fungal infection of the vagina that causes itching and burning of the vulva, the area around the vagina. Women usually have a yeast infection in the vaginal areas as this area has ideal conditions for yeast growth caused by Candida, a type of fungi. 

A vaginal yeast infection causes irritation, discharge, and intense itchiness of the vagina and the vulva, the tissues at the vaginal opening. It affects up to 3 out of 4 women at some point in their lifetimes. The infection can be prevented by wearing cotton undergarments and changing wet bathing suits and sweaty clothing immediately. 

Anyone is prone to yeast infection but the people at higher risk include women who are pregnant, use hormonal contraceptives, are taking certain antibiotics, or have health conditions like diabetes or weakened immunity.

The diagnosis of yeast infection can be done by considering the medical history and undergoing a physical examination. A sample of discharge is needed from the vagina to confirm the yeast infection. Treatment of this infection is usually done with antifungal ointments or creams.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults between 25-34 years of age
Gender affected
Women
Body part(s) involved
Vagina
Mimicking Conditions
Lichen sclerosus
Lichen planus
Necessary health tests/imaging
Pelvic examination
pH test
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT)
Treatment
Candida diet
Supplements for candida infections
Anti-fungal medications: Miconazole, Terconazole, Ketoconazole, Fluconazole & Itraconazole
Specialists to consult
Gynecologist
Symptoms Of Vaginal Yeast Infection 
  The symptoms can range from mild to moderate and some of the common symptoms of yeast infection are: 
Itching and irritation 
Redness and swelling 
Rash 
White, and thick discharge that resembles cottage cheese

The severity of symptoms depends on the length of the untreated period. In other words, if you leave it without any treatment for a long period it may have a negative effect and lead to more serious health problems such as:

Yeast infection in the vagina leads to abnormal vaginal discharge (thick, white, odor-free vaginal discharge with a cottage cheese appearance)
Itching or soreness of the vagina
Vaginal rash
Pain during sexual intercourse
Watery vaginal discharge
Pain or burning when urinating

If it is left untreated or if you have any risk factors, it can lead to a complicated yeast infection with symptoms such as:

Persistent or many yeast infections per year
Swollen or irritated vaginal tissue 
Itching leading to cracks, tears, or sores
Causes Of Vaginal Yeast Infection 

In many people, Candida fungus is harmless. However, there are certain conditions which may trigger the yeast to cause an infection. Here are some of the most common causes of yeast infections.
1. Hormonal changes 
Hormonal imbalance, especially imbalance in sex hormones like estrogen and progesterone, may affect the balance of fungus and other bacteria in the vagina, causing a yeast infection. It can also happen during pregnancy, breasfeeding, and menopause (if you are on hormone replacement therapyor HRT)
2. Diabetes  
In women with uncontrolled diabetes, there is a higher risk of vaginal yeast infection because excess glucose can act as a food medium for yeast. Also, fungi can grow in any warm, moist fold of skin such as between fingers and toes, under breasts, and in or around sex organs.
3. Poor hygiene 
Poor hygiene and infrequent bathing can allow the yeast to build up in the crevices of the skin. This allows the growth of yeast in sweaty and moist skin, leading to an infection.
4. Tight clothing 
Clothes including undergarments that are too tight or made of a fabric that does not allow the skin to breathe can contribute to the growth of yeast. 
5. A weakened immune system
An immune system that is compromised due to a disorder like HIV infection or medications that suppresses the immune system like steroids and chemotherapy can create opportunities for yeast and fungus to grow unchecked, causing a yeast infection.
6. Medications 
Taking antibiotics for infections like urinary tract infections, can kill beneficial bacteria, leaving space for yeast to grow. In certain conditions, taking medications is necessary and the side effects can weaken the immune system and therefore cause yeast infection.

Specifically, corticosteroids are used in treating arthritis, asthma, autoimmune diseases, and allergic reactions increasing the chance of getting a candidiasis. Medications like tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors are used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis can increase the chances of getting histoplasmosis. It is an infection caused by a fungus called Histoplasma, which lives particularly in soil that contains large amounts of bird or bat droppings.
7. Sexual intercourse 
Although not common, person with an active yeast infection can pass that infection on to sexual partners through unprotected genital or oral contact. Engaging in sexual activity during a yeast infection can exacerbate the symptoms and also delay the healing process.
8. Stress
Ongoing stress can cause the body to produce elevated levels of cortisol, which can impair the immune system, and the ability to fight infections, and can prolong a yeast infection. Both chronic stress and reduced antioxidant capacity are risk factors for recurrent vaginal yeast infections.
Risk Factors Of Vaginal Yeast Infection 

The risk factors of vaginal yeast infection include women who are:
Are pregnant
Use hormonal contraceptives like birth control pills
Have uncontrolled diabetes 
Are taking or have recently taken antibiotics or immunosuppressive medications like steroids or those used during chemotherapy
Have a weakened immune system due to HIV infection 
Diagnosis Of Vaginal Yeast Infection 

To diagnose vaginal yeast infection, the common diagnostic steps includes:
1. Medical history 
A doctor will discuss all the obvious symptoms, the level of severity, the duration of time a person has been experiencing the symptoms, and also note down the complete medical history to date. 
2. Physical examination 
 Appearances of rashes on the vaginal folds, and reddened skin rashes from the body are indicative of yeast infection. In some cases, vaginal yeast infection can cause a clumpy white discharge. However, the discharge alone is not enough to diagnose a vaginal yeast infection. The doctor must also conduct a few lab tests to determine whether yeast is present in the vaginal secretions.
3. Lab tests 
The type of test depends on the location of your symptoms:
The standard test is to diagnose a sample of vaginal fluid to determine the type of fungus causing the yeast infection. Identifying the fungus can help the doctor to prescribe a more effective treatment for recurrent yeast infections. The microscopic examination would look for clue cells (vaginal cells studded with bacteria). Gram staining is usually performed to differentiate good bacteria from bad bacteria, this lab test allows to check for imbalances in the vaginal flora.
A pelvic examination is done to check the extent of the yeast infection. 
A pH test is done to check for vaginal acidity. It measures how acidic or alkaline your vagina is on the pH scale. A healthy vaginal pH range is between 3.8 to 4 and is moderately acidic so that it can actively fight bacteria. When your vaginal pH is above 4, it is less acidic, making it easy for bacteria and yeast to thrive. If you are experiencing itching, burning, and discomfort and your vagina has a pH of 4.5-5.0, you may be experiencing a yeast infection.
4. Molecular tests 
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) can be used to identify small amounts of DNA or RNA in test samples. This test can be, therefore, used to identify bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens even when it is present in very small amounts. The urine sample is collected for NAAT testing. This test is less useful for diagnosing a yeast infection than it is widely used for identifying sexually transmitted infections.  
A culture test can definitively diagnose a yeast infection, this is done by extracting cells from a vagina with the help of a swab and hence providing a proper sterile medium for the growth of yeast. If the  infection is present, yeast will grow and if not, no growth will be found in the medium.
Prevention Of Vaginal Yeast Infection

1. Wearing breathable undergarments
Cotton is the best choice of fabric as it doesn’t hold onto heat or moisture. It helps in keeping you dry and can prevent vaginal or genital yeast infection.  

2. Wear loose clothes
Wearing too tight-fitted clothes like jeans, skirts, underwear, yoga pants, and tights, can boost body temperature and increase the amount of moisture around the private parts. Therefore, it raises the chances of yeast infection.

3. Avoid douching 
The acidic environment protects the vagina from infections or irritation. Feminine hygiene products like douches can disrupt the balance of bacteria in the vagina by removing some of the good bacteria that can fight infections.

4. Changing wet clothes immediately 
Sitting in a wet bathing suit after swimming or damp workout clothes after the gym is not advised as moist and wet clothes have the strongest potential of causing yeast infection. 

5. Limiting the use of antibiotics
Taking antibiotics for infections like cold and flu can kill off beneficial bacteria, leaving space for yeast to grow.

6. Maintaining good personal hygiene
At the time of the menstrual cycle, the overgrowth of yeast infection is high. Changing sanitary napkins, tampons and undergarments are useful and often save the person from recurrent infections. 

7. Managing diabetes and high blood pressure 
The frequency and length of time the blood pressure is greater than 250 mg/dL can be a causative agent of yeast infection; it can be controlled by limiting the salt intake in food and avoiding stress. Diabetes can be managed by keeping an eye on sugar intake. 

8. Drinking probiotics and eating yogurt 
These contain active live cultures of good bacteria and yeast that help in replenishing body’s flora and maintain the growth of yeast infection. Taking supplements with lactobacillus acidophilus may also help prevent them.

Vaginal infections are the most common type of yeast infection. Here are a few more tips to manage them better. 
Click To Read!
Specialist To Visit

A general practitioner can evaluate the symptoms of vaginal yeast infection and start the treatment. He/she can further refer to a specialist for further assessment. 
Gynecologists (specialists in checking vaginal infections for checking symptoms like vaginal discharge, itching, and discomfort during urination). 
Candida Specialists ( a functional medical practitioner, to find the cause or reason behind repeated infections). 

If you are facing any symptoms, consult our healthcare professionals.
Consult Now!


Treatment Of Vaginal Yeast Infection 

The treatment for yeast infection depends on the age, overall health, and how widespread the infection is, and other factors to determine your treatment. It also depends on whether the infection is simple or complicated.

Simple infections are typically cleared up in a week using easily accessible oral or vaginal antifungal medications while complicated yeast infections should be treated with help of a general practitioner. A course of antifungal cream and medications is required for 7 to 14 days. The treatment aims at:
Creating a natural environment in the body where candida cannot overgrow
Providing the body with the key nutrients needed to repair the damage caused by the infection
1. Candida diet 
The candida diet is essentially a low-carbohydrate, low-sugar, anti-inflammatory diet that helps to promote good gut health. The following are the foods that need to be added and avoided in diet to promote a healthy lifestyle without yeast infections. 
Protein: This is a mandatory part of the candida diet. Lean cuts of proteins and eggs are an important part of protein sources. 
Remove the problem foods: First, you need to remove the foods from your diet that feed the candida and encourage it to flourish in your body. Foods like sugar, white flour, yeast, and alcohol are believed to promote candida overgrowth. The diet should be mainly centered on vegetables and gluten-free foods like brown rice and millet.
Low sugar fruits only: At times, when the infection is at its peak, avoiding eating fruits because even though fruits are healthy, they get converted into sugar which can trigger growth of yeast. Only selective fruits like berries, lime, lemon, green apples, and avocados can be trusted.
Include green veggies: Green veggies such as cucumber, spinach, asparagus, and capsicum are included in the candida diet plan. All vegetables should be consumed fresh and raw.
Fermented foods: Fermentation is a process that converts all carbohydrates into organic acids. Yogurt is the best example of fermented food. If you have candida, fermented foods are the best as it is also good for digestion.
Replacing all drinks with water: While following the candida diet, it is best to replace all drinks with fresh water.  Drinks containing sugar, fizzy drinks, fruit juices, milkshakes, and hot drinks like tea and coffee should be avoided. Caffeine intake should also be restricted since it elevates the blood sugar levels.
2. Anti-candida supplements 
Probiotics: Yeast infections are usually a result of gut flora imbalances between candida and the friendly organisms that normally control yeast overgrowth. Probiotics supplements work by populating the intestine with beneficial organisms that can help to restore these imbalances. A few examples of probiotics are yogurt, and kefir (a fermented milk drink, it is a better source of probiotics than yogurt, and people with lactose intolerance can often drink kefir with no problems). Other examples of probiotics are traditional buttermilk, and some types of cheese are a rich source of protein, calcium, and Vitamin B12. 
Antifungal supplements: Antifungals and anti-candida supplements contain ingredients that directly or indirectly can kill candida and yeast in the body. A list of antifungals and herbs for candida and yeast infection includes tea tree oil, oregano oil, and coconut oil. The same applies also to natural extracts such as echinacea and astragalus that have immune-boosting abilities, and also have antifungal properties.
3. Medications 
The treatment for vaginal yeast infections depends on the severity and frequency of your infections.

For mild to moderate symptoms and infrequent episodes, your doctor might recommend:
Short-term vaginal therapy for three to seven days which usually clears up the infection. These medications are available in the form of ointments, creams, tablets, and suppositories. Common examples include miconazole and terconazole. 
Antifungals may be taken orally as single dose fluconazole or can be applied intravaginally in a single day or 3-day regimen that is available over-the-counter (OTC). 

For severe symptoms and frequent yeast infections, your doctor may recommend:
Long-course vaginal therapy taken for two weeks followed by once a week for six months. The therapy includes intravaginal azole therapy, which is the first line of treatment for many fungal infections. They are often administered for weeks to months. Oral azole drugs like ketoconazole,  fluconazole, and itraconazole represent a major advance in systemic antifungal therapy. 
In case of complicated infection, the administered dose of fluconazole 150 mg is increased as it is given orally, once every 3 days for three doses.
In a few cases of azole-resistant therapy, the doctor might recommend a boric acid capsule, inserted into your vagina. This medication may be fatal if taken orally and is used only to treat candida fungus that is resistant to the usual antifungal agents.
Home-care For Vaginal Yeast Infection 

In many cases, yeast infections can be easily and successfully treated at home. This is done with either over-the-counter products or alternative therapies.

1. Boric acid
It is a powerful antiseptic with mild antifungal properties that is useful for treating yeast infections that are resistant to other remedies.

Tip: Dilute some boric acid with water, apply the diluted solution to the affected area and rinse it. This can be done for two weeks to get rid of yeast infection. 

2. Apple cider vinegar
One of the most popular remedies for yeast infection is an apple cider vinegar bath. The acidic component of vinegar can eliminate any harmful microorganisms, including yeast.

Tip: A hot bath can be prepared by adding some vinegar. Soak your body in this bath for about an hour, this helps in lessening the skin irritation and itching.

3. Tea tree oil
It is an essential oil that’s used to kill fungi, bacteria, and viruses. This oil has powerful and effective natural antifungal properties that can help in the treatment of yeast infections. 

Tip: Dilute organic tea tree oil with water or one teaspoon of olive oil and rub the diluted oil over the affected skin area several times a day.

4. Coconut oil
It has effective antifungal properties that can kill the fungi responsible for yeast infections. Pure coconut oil helps treat vaginal yeast infection and can be applied directly to the affected area.

Tip: Make a mixture of equal amounts of coconut oil and cinnamon oil. Apply it to the affected skin area to control the growth of the infection.

5. Calendula
It is a kind of herb that has potent antifungal and anti-inflammatory properties that can help treat yeast infections.

Tip: Two to three calendula leaves can be crushed, apply the crushed leaves topically onto the infected area. This can be done two to three times a week.

6. Cranberries
They contain both antibacterial and antifungal properties and can be used to fight the fungi responsible for yeast infections. 

Tip: Drinking cranberry juice without sugar, several times a day can help in speeding up the healing process and provide effective results within a short time.

7. Yogurt
Lactobacillus acidophilus, a friendly strain of bacteria present in yogurt, can control the growth of infection in the body. 

Tip: Plain, unsweetened yogurt can be added daily to the diet. Adding yogurt helps increase the gut microbiome and can reduce yeast in the body.
Complications Of Vaginal Yeast Infection

Some complications occurring due to yeast infection are:
1. Spread to other organs  
The most common complication of a yeast infection is the spreading of yeast infection to other organs. In a few cases, the yeast cells enter the blood and reach the various other organs, leading to many other serious complications like endocarditis, meningitis, and arthritis. The organs commonly affected by Candida are the lungs, liver, heart, brain, joints, and intestine. 
2. Pregnancy complications 
In some cases, vaginal yeast infections may sometimes cause problems with a pregnancy. Pregnant women with yeast infections experience preterm labor, and preterm rupture of membranes. 
3. Urinary tract candidiasis
Candida infection can spread to the urinary tract. One of the rare complications of yeast infection is renal candidiasis. This condition occurs due to the spread of infection through the blood to renal cells.
4. Recurrent infections 
If the infection is not treated properly once, there may be a chance that the infection might come back. Recurrent yeast infections can be disruptive to a person's well-being. It can also cause difficulties in a relationship, if the yeast infections disrupt normal sexual activity.
Alternative Therapies For Vaginal Yeast Infection
  Several alternative therapies emphasize yeast infection treatment on the elimination of the causes, rather than eliminating the fungus.
1. Aromatherapy 
Aromatherapy is the practice of using the natural oils extracted from flowers, bark, stems, leaves, roots, or other parts of a plant to get rid of the itching and rashes related to yeast infection.

The tea tree oil is widely used to treat a variety of infections and is considered to be one of the more powerful infection-fighting oils. Other oils like clove oil, oregano oil, and lavender oil can also be used. For vaginal infection, 5 to 8 drops of essential oil can be mixed with one liter of water, Use this mixture to perform vaginal douche.
2. Chinese medicine for yeast infection
Acupuncture, herbal therapy, and diet and lifestyle changes offer ways to correct energy imbalances and enhance the body's defenses. Acupuncture and Chinese medicine can also help with combating stress and correcting the body’s imbalances. It also helps the liver and kidney to discharge all the toxins released by the dead yeast.
3. Herbal medicine 
Several herbs can knock out excess fungus, while the others are effective in strengthening the immune system. Goldenseal is one of the most commonly used herbs for its immune-boosting properties, and it is also believed to be effective in stabilizing the overgrowth of fungus.

The other herbs useful in eliminating yeast infection are calendula, thyme, rosemary, chamomile, and ginger. These herbs can be taken in the form of capsules, and extracts, or can be added to tea. 
4. Mind/body medicine for yeast infection 
Chronic stress may also lead to too much yeast in the body. It is therefore recommended to relax the mind and reduce stress by meditation. Joining social groups and communities, and engaging in social activities can help modulate the mind and hence reduce stress. 
Living With Vaginal Yeast Infection 

If you frequently have yeast infections, you should discuss them with your healthcare provider. However, it is important to remember that an early diagnosis of yeast infection can help in clearing up the infection with antifungal medication and can save the person from further implications. 
Make sure that the person understands the diagnosis and its health implications. 
Regular checkup is required to evaluate the present infection and whether the person is receiving the right treatment which helps in subsiding the infection.
Routine blood sugar level evaluation is required in case of yeast infection, as yeast overgrows in elevated sugar levels.
Discussion of any possible hormonal changes due to menopause, pregnancy, and hormone replacement therapy. These changes lead to hormonal imbalance and hence put a person at a greater risk of developing Candida yeast infections.
A test for HIV/AIDS is required if a person is having frequent yeast infection.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the medical name for a yeast infection?
Can anything be done to reduce the frequency of vaginal yeast infections?
Is yeast infection a sexually transmitted disease?
Are recurrent yeast infections related to an underlying medical condition?
References
Jeanmonod R, Jeanmonod D. Vaginal Candidiasis. [Updated 2021 Jul 21].
Bongomin F, Gago S, Oladele RO, Denning DW. Global and Multi-National Prevalence of Fungal Diseases-Estimate Precision. J Fungi (Basel). 2017 Oct 18.
Van Kessel K, Assefi N, Marrazzo J, Eckert L. Common complementary and alternative therapies for yeast vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2003 May.
Cornu M, Goudjil S, Kongolo G, Leke A, Poulain D, Chouaki T, Sendid B. Evaluation of the (1,3)-β-D-glucan assay for the diagnosis of neonatal invasive yeast infections. Med Mycol. 2018 Jan 1.
White PL, Price JS, Cordey A, Backx M. Molecular Diagnosis of Yeast Infections. Curr Fungal Infect Rep. 2021;15.
Yeast Infection. Health. Johns Hopkins Medicine.
Treatment for Invasive Candidiasis. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). November 2020.
Fungal Infections: Protect Your Health.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).August 2021.
Medications that Weaken Your Immune System and Fungal Infections.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).December 2020.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.