Rosacea
Also known as Acne rosacea, Couperrose, and Facial erythrosis
Overview
Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by repeated episodes of redness, flushing, acne-like breakouts, and small dilated blood vessels on the skin.

Rosacea usually involves the central region of the face, mainly the forehead, cheeks, chin, and the lower half of the nose. It can also cause pink, irritated eyes with an increased sensitivity to light.

The symptoms are usually triggered by various factors such as sunlight, spicy foods, stress, alcohol amongst others. The condition predominantly affects individuals with a lighter skin tone. 

Diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the type of rosacea and its triggers. The treatment options include several topical and oral anti-inflammatory medications and antibiotics. Surgery may be recommended in severe cases to remove the thickened skin.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Individuals between 30 to 50 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Cheeks
Chin
Nose
Forehead
Nose
Ears 
Eyes
Prevalence
Global: 5.46% (2018)
Mimicking Conditions
Acne
Psoriasis
Seborrheic dermatitis
Keratosis pilaris rubra
Flushing
Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Drug-induced acneiform eruption
Necessary health tests/imaging
Physical examination
Treatment
Topical therapies: Brimonidine, Oxymetazoline, Azelaic acid, Ivermectin, Metronidazole, Minocycline, Tranexamic acid, Benzoyl peroxide, Ciclosporin, Tacrolimus & Pimecrolimus  
Oral therapies: Tetracycline, Doxycycline, Isotretinoin, Erythromycin, Azithromycin, Clarithromycin, Isotretinoin, Carvedilol & Propranolol 
Laser and light therapies: Intense pulsed light, pulsed dye laser, Potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser, Diode laser & Ablative laser
Injectables: Botulinum toxin & Secukinumab
Surgery
See All
Symptoms Of Rosacea

The symptoms of rosacea are complex. The appearance and pattern of symptoms vary among individuals. The symptoms often cycle between occurrence and remission when the individual does not experience any symptoms.

The condition usually affects the face but other body parts such as sides of the face, ears, neck, scalp and chest can also be involved.

The symptoms progress from having red skin of the nose and cheeks to long lasting redness. These symptoms often lead to the appearance of a rash and small blood vessels beneath the skin.
  Because of the complexity of signs and symptoms, the condition is divided into 4 subtypes. Individuals can have more than one subtype at the same time. The treatment approaches of every subtype are different.
  Subtype 1: Erythemato-telangiectatic rosacea (ETR)
This subtype usually affects the face. Individuals with this subtype have very sensitive skin. The classical symptoms include:
Persistent redness of the central face 
Telangiectasia (visible blood vessels on the face)
Stinging and burning sensation on the skin
Dry skin
Swollen skin
Scaling 
Tendency to blush more easily 
Increased sensitivity to skin

Subtype 2: Papulopustular rosacea
The most common symptom of this subtype is the appearance of acne like breakouts. The spots resemble acne but there are no blackheads and white-heads. The breakouts do not remain permanently and usually come and go. This type is more common in middle aged females.
Most of the symptoms are the same as type 1. The other distinguishing symptoms include: 
Papules (solid raised spots on the skin)
Pustules (small, inflamed pus filled lesions on the skin)
Plaques (raised scaly patches on the skin)
Oily skin

Subtype 3: Phymatous rosacea
This subtype primarily affects the nose but may also involve chin, forehead, ears, and eyelids. It is mainly characterized by the thickening of skin.
This subtype is rare and include the following symptoms: 
Bumpy texture of the skin
Larger pores on the skin
Oily skin
Thickened skin on the chin, forehead, cheeks and ears
Rhinophyma (thickening of the skin of the nose)

Subtype 4: Ocular rosacea
This subtype affects the eye and individual can have one or more of the following symptoms:
Bloodshot or watery appearance
Feeling of having sand in the eyes
Burning/stinging sensation in the eyes
Dry eyes
Itching in the eyes
Increased sensitivity to light
Blurred vision
Visible broken blood vessels on an eyelid
Cyst on the eyelid

Did you know?
Earlier, rhinophyma was thought to be caused by heavy alcohol use. But later on studies suggest that rhinophyma occurs in both people who do not consume alcohol and in those who drink heavily. The problem is much more common in men than in women and is usually associated with severe rosacea.
Causes Of Rosacea

The exact cause of rosacea is not known. While the causes of inflammation are not fully understood, the following theories have been postulated:
Genes
Some theories suggest the role of genes in developing rosacea and making some individuals more prone to skin inflammation. 
Alterations in immunity (first line of defense)
Our body has a natural immunity against disease causing microbes. This immunity is provided by specific chemicals, which are released after stimulation of receptors present on the skin.
Individuals with rosacea have an increased expression of these receptors, leading to elevated levels of specific chemicals which trigger skin inflammation even in the absence of any microbes. 
Ultraviolet  (UV) light
Both UVA and UVB light contribute to the development of rosacea by triggering the inflammatory cascade mentioned above. 
Abnormalities in the blood vessels
Triggers such as sun rays may be responsible for the degeneration of the elastic tissue of the skin and dilation of blood vessels of the face. This may cause rosacea symptoms such as flushing, persistent redness and visible broken blood vessels. 
Triggers that initiate inflammation
External triggers such as ultraviolet rays (UV), spicy food, alcohol, exercise, and stress may stimulate the immune system and nerves to cause dilation of blood vessels. This can lead to inflammation and redness seen in rosacea.
Role of mites and bacteria
Mites known as demodex folliculorum live harmlessly on the skin of human beings. However, studies suggest that these mites are present in large numbers in rosacea patients. 
Other microbes that may cause rosacea is Staphylococcus epidermidis. This bacteria is not found on normal skin and triggers an immune response that may cause rosacea. 
H.pylori, a bacteria known to cause gastritis, gastric cancer, and gastrointestinal ulcers is also known to be associated with rosacea. 
Defective skin barrier
A defective skin barrier function can also lead to symptoms of inflammation, redness, and blisters that are characteristic of rosacea. 
Risk Factors For Rosacea

The risk factors that are associated with rosacea include:
Age
Individuals between the age of 30 to 50 years of age are more prone to rosacea. 
Gender
Females are at higher risk of having rosacea. However, the symptoms tend to be more severe in males. 
Ethnicity
People of specific European ancestry such as Celtic or Scandinavian are more likely to have rosacea. 
Skin tone
It is seen that lighter skin individuals are more susceptible to the development of rosacea. 
Positive family history
It is seen that many people with rosacea have a family history of rosacea. Individuals having a familial history of acne are also at a higher risk of developing rosacea. 
Medical history 
Individuals who have a lot of acne, acne cysts, and/or nodules are at higher risk of developing rosacea. 
Sunlight exposure
Long term sunlight exposure especially during peak sun hours can increase the susceptibility to rosacea.  
Weather 
Windburn is a painful skin inflammation that occurs after prolonged exposure to winds. It is commonly associated with rosacea flare-up, especially in the winter.
Cosmetics
The use of waterproof cosmetics, heavy foundations that require a makeup remover are associated with an increased risk of rosacea. 
Stress
Stress also serves as a trigger for rosacea by increasing the level of hormone cortisol. Consistently high levels of cortisol can lead to inflammation and a weakened immune system, triggering rosacea.

What Happens To Your Body When You Are Stressed?
Read Now
Menopause
The hormonal fluctuations during menopause also serve as a trigger for rosacea. 
  Book this test if you are experiencing irregular periods, vaginal dryness, sleep problems, hot flashes, anxiety, and depression as this can be a sign of menopause.

Book Now

Other triggers that can increase rosacea flare ups include:
Strenuous exercise 
Hot baths
Humidity 
Alcohol
Spicy food containing capsaicin, mostly found in red chili peppers, cayenne pepper, jalapeno peppers, bell peppers, paprika and green peppers.
Food items containing the compound cinnamaldehyde, such as cinnamon, cassia, tomatoes, citrus fruits.
Foods high in histamine, such as aged cheese, wine, nuts, legumes, smoked fish and processed meats
Hot caffeinated drinks like coffee, tea, cider, and cocoa 
Chocolate
Dairy products
Diagnosis Of Rosacea
  There is no specific diagnostic test for rosacea. Diagnosis is usually made after a physical examination of the skin and eyes. The patients are also asked about any potential triggers, symptoms, and medical history. 
In some cases, medical tests are performed to rule out the presence of any other disease with resembling symptoms such as lupus and allergic skin reaction. 
  Are Rosacae and Psoriasis the same?
While rosacea and psoriasis can both be caused by genetic and age-related factors, they are different conditions. Rosacea usually causes flushing which is limited to the face. In severe cases, acne and thickened skin can be seen in rosacea. On the other hand, psoriasis usually causes red, scaly plaques on the entire body, amongst other symptoms.

Read this detailed account on psoriasis.
Click Here
Celebs affected
Sai Pallavi
Sai is an accomplished Indian actress and dancer. She has shared in one of her interviews that she is photosensitive and turns pink in front of the camera and light.
Bill Clinton
Former US president Bill Clinton reportedly suffered from rosacea flare-ups. Sun exposure and stress were reported as the most important triggers for his condition.
Sofia Vargera
Sofia is an American and Colombian actress. She suffers from rosacea and has managed the condition by switching from her favorite beauty products to ones that are more suitable for sensitive skin.
Specialist To Visit 
  The early recognition and treatment can help in the prevention of permanent changes in the face. The following speciality of doctor might help in preventing the same:
General physician
Dermatologists: The doctor who specializes in conditions of the skin, hair, and nails.
Ophthalmologist (in case of ocular rosacea): The specialist who manages and treats eye problems. 

Consult India’s best doctors online from the comfort of your home.
Consult Now
Prevention Of Rosacea
  Avoidance of triggers
Rosacea can have multiple triggers such as:
Sunlight
Humidity 
Cold winds
Strenuous exercise 
Hot baths
Stress
Alcohol
Spicy food 
Caffeinated drinks
Dairy products
Makeup and cosmetic 

Avoiding and limiting these triggers are helpful in preventing the flare-ups but not the occurrence of disease.
However, limiting sun exposure can play an important role in preventing the disease. The following measures can be taken to prevent exposure of sun:
Spend less time in direct sun
The exposure to the sun should be restricted to prevent rosacea. The person should avoid going outdoors when the sun is at its peak, which is usually 11 am to 3 pm. Additionally, sunbathing should be avoided at all costs.
Cover yourself up in the sun
Wear lightweight clothing
Use wide-brimmed hats
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants
Use clothes made from tight woven fabric
Use thoroughly dry clothes
Wear dark colored clothes as they absorb more UV rays
Wear clothes with ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) above 30
Use shade while going out
Staying under an umbrella, tree, or any surface also protects the skin to get exposed to the sun when needed. 
Wear sunglasses
Sunglasses should be used while moving out under the sun. They not only protect eyes but also the soft skin around the eyes. 
Use sunscreens diligently
A strict sunscreen regimen is the cornerstone of sun protection. All individuals, especially people with high risk should wear a high quality sunscreen with Sun protection factor (SPF) 30 or more to protect their skin under the sun. 
Tips to use sunscreen effectively!
How much to use: An FTU o Fingertip Unit is used to measure the amount of cream that covers the end of the finger to the first crease of a finger. For the face and neck, use 2.5 FTU. To cover the other exposed parts of the body, you need an ounce of sunscreen, which is sufficient to fill a shot glass.
When to apply: Always apply sunscreen around half an hour before going out because it takes at least 30 minutes for the chemicals in sunscreen to get absorbed and start working.
When to reapply: If you are going out, playing sports or exercising outdoors, it is advised to re-apply the sunscreen every 2 hours. The same rule applies when you go swimming.
How to store: Usually, it is recommended to store in a cool, dry place, away from sunlight. Also, do remember to close it properly after every use.
When to discard: Do not use sunscreen that has passed its expiry date or if there are any visible changes in the sunscreen such as a change in color, smell or consistency. It is advised to buy a new one every year.

Looking for the right sunscreen? Watch our doctor discuss how to choose the best sunscreen for yourself.
Click Here

Treatment Of Rosacea

The treatment approach of rosacea depends upon its type and symptoms and is individualized for every patient. The following points are taken into consideration before initiating treatment:
Symptoms 
Triggers
Patient’s wish of the appearance
Psychological aspect
Goals of the treatment
Easing the discomfort 
Preventing rosacea from worsening
Due to the multiple symptoms observed in rosacea, there is a stepwise approach to combat them. It includes: 

Step 1: Controlling the inflammatory lesions through anti-inflammatory medications and antibiotics
Step 2: Getting rid of the blood vessels using laser technology
Step 3: Minimizing the background redness by using brimonidine 

The best treatment outcome is offered by a combination of the following therapies:
Topical therapies
These are the first line of therapy and are available in the form of cream, gel, and ointments. The medications that are given via topical therapy include anti-inflammatory medications and antibiotics. 
 US-FDA approved topical agents include:
Azelaic acid
Metronidazole
Sodium sulfacetamide 
Brimonidine 
Other topical medications include:
Retinoids like adapalene, tretinoin 
Calcineurin inhibitors like tacrolimus and pimecrolimus
Macrolides like erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin 
Benzoyl peroxide
Permethrin 
Ivermectin
Clindamycin
Oxymetazoline 
Minocycline
Tranexamic acid

Note: Ciclosporin ophthalmic emulsion is usually recommended for ocular rosacea.

Oral therapies
Oral therapies are generally used in combinations to treat moderate to severe papulopustular rosacea. 
 US-FDA-approved oral medications include:
Tetracycline, doxycycline, and minocycline 
Other oral medications include:
Macrolides like erythromycin, azithromycin, and clarithromycin 
Beta- blockers like Carvedilol and propranolol
Isotretinoin
Oral Ivermectin
Laser and light-based therapy
Some clinical symptoms of rosacea such as telangiectasias, persistent facial erythema, and phymas (especially rhinophyma) do not respond well to the above-mentioned approaches. 
Lasers and light-based therapies are used to destroy the dilated blood vessels present in the superficial skin.

Commonly used lasers include:
Intense pulsed light laser
Pulsed dye laser
Potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser
Diode laser
Ablative laser
Surgery
It is used rarely to remove the thickened skin in phymatous rosacea. The skin is excised with razor blades and tangential excisions using scalpel under either local or general anesthesia.
Radiofrequency ablation (uses heat to target the affected tissue) is very effective in the treatment of rhinophyma. It has a better safety profile than lasers as it produces less heat in the tissues. 
Injectables are also used to treat severe rosacea, resistant to topical and oral medications. Examples include:
Intradermal botulinum toxin 
Secukinumab 
Home-care For Rosacea

Incorporate lifestyle interventions
Rosacea remains for life as there is no permanent cure of the condition. Some lifestyle interventions are important to prevent the flare-ups and to improve the overall quality of life.

Do’s
Wear sunscreen daily
Choose low-intensity workouts in an air-conditioned gym 
Cleanse your face at least twice a day gently
Apply moisturizer daily, especially after taking a shower

Don’ts
Do not go out in the sun, if not necessary
Do not try cosmetics without consulting dermatologist
Do not consume alcohol

Eat consciously 

Foods to limit/avoid
Spicy food containing capsaicin, mostly found in red chili peppers, cayenne pepper, jalapeno peppers, bell peppers, paprika and green peppers.
Food items containing the compound cinnamaldehyde, such as cinnamon, cassia, tomatoes, citrus fruits.
Foods high in histamine, such as aged cheese, wine, nuts, legumes, smoked fish and processed meats
Hot caffeinated drinks like coffee, tea, cider, and cocoa 
Chocolate
Dairy products
Artificial sweeteners
Processed foods containing preservatives, dietary emulsifiers or additives

Foods to include
Foods that promote a healthy gut microbiome should be included in the diet. This includes a fiber-rich diet and probiotics (foods containing good bacteria). The examples of such food include:
A variety of vegetables including beans, broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage
Whole grains like wheat, oats and barley
Yogurt
Pickled vegetables
Kale
Kefir (fermented milk drink)
Kombucha tea
Kimchi
Sauerkraut
Try home remedies
Some traditional and old age home remedies can give respite from rosacea. However, it is important to take consent from your doctor before using any of these in rosacea:

Lavender: It is known from centuries for its use in rashes and other skin ailments such as rosacea. The topical application of lavender oil eases inflammation and shrinks blood vessels.
Licorice (Mulethi): The strong anti-inflammatory activity of licorice can be used to control redness of rosacea. It can be applied in powdered form directly on the skin. 
Feverfew: This plant prevents blood from pooling in facial capillaries and reducing the appearance of facial blood vessels in rosacea. The dried leaves of the feverfew can be directly consumed. The extract of feverfew (made by boiling the leaves with water followed by straining) can also be applied topically.
Green tea: It is loaded with anti-inflammatory properties and helps reduce sun-triggered rosacea flare ups. Studies have also shown that consumption of green tea is associated with the prevention of papules and pustules associated with rosacea.

Shop from a variety of green tea and herbal teas.
Order Now

Oatmeal: The application of oatmeal reduces itchiness and dryness in rosacea patients. Oatmeal can be easily prepared at home by boiling oats with water for about 20 minutes. 
Chamomile: It has several active compounds that reduce inflammation. According to studies, chamomile-based creams are effective in managing mild to moderate rosacea. 
Aloe vera: It minimizes inflammation of the skin in rosacea. Aloe vera can be directly applied on the skin for the effect. 
Coconut oil (Nariyal tel): It is a wonderful remedy for rosacea due to its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and moisturizing benefits. The coconut oil can be directly applied on the affected skin. 
Raw honey (Shehad): Raw honey keeps the skin moist which is helpful in rosacea patients as dry skin worsens rosacea.
Tea tree oil: The application of tea tree oil is associated with reducing inflammation and itching associated with rosacea. 
Turmeric (Haldi): It possesses anti-inflammatory properties and is used to reduce pain and inflammation in rosacea. It can be consumed in food or can be applied on the skin as a thick paste.

Shop from our extensive range of turmeric products.
Add to cart now

Complications Of Rosacea

In most of cases, rosacea does not lead to any complications. But, if left untreated, it can develop permanent scarring and persistent redness.
The prevalence of rosacea is also found to be associated with a series of cardiovascular diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, neurologic disorders, and psychiatric disorders. 
Alternative Therapies For Rosacea

Plant-based therapies
Ginkgo biloba: It is a herbal supplement that possesses antioxidant properties. It is also known to reduce redness of the skin by reducing blood circulation. 
Chrysanthellum indicum: This plant has been found to possess anti-inflammatory properties. Its extract protects the skin from UVB induced skin damage. In a study, a reduction in the redness and overall improvement of rosacea was seen after the application of C. indicum cream. 
Quassia extract: Quassia amara is a small South American tree thought to have anti-inflammatory properties.  Studies have shown that application of quassia gel is associated with an improvement in rosacea.
Living With Rosacea

Living with rosacea is challenging due to its longer duration. The relapses and remissions of the condition also makes the journey exhausting. It also affects psychological and mental health due to changes in the facial appearance. 
The following measures are prove to be helpful in easing symptoms:
Avoid triggers
Rosacea is triggered by several factors such as spices, caffeinated drinks, sunlight, stress, strenuous exercise, waterproof cosmetics, and heavy foundations. Patients should understand these triggers and should avoid them. This will help in relieving symptoms that are aggravated by the triggers. 
Establish a good cleansing regimen
Patients should clean the skin regularly with a cleanser before going to bed. The skin cleansing regimen should also be followed after coming home from outside. This helps in removing oil and dirt that might irritate the skin. The following tips proves to be helpful in reducing the symptoms:
Choose mild cleanser 
Avoid soaps as they are harsh which can further damage the skin
Rinse off the cleanser with lukewarm water 
Use only fingertips to clean the face
Moisturize your skin regularly
The dry skin is more prone to sun damage. So, use a good moisturizer after applying serum to restore the lipid barrier of the skin. Studies have also shown that moisturizers improve the results of treatment. 

Explore our wide range of moisturizers.
Order Now

Protect your skin from the sun every day
Sun is the most important trigger for rosacea. It is very important to protect the skin from the sun even on cloudy days. Sunscreen should be applied daily irrespective of the weather.  
Choose a sunscreen from our extensive range.
Add to cart

Choose gentle skin care products
Many skin care products and cosmetics can irritate the skin. Waterproof and opaque makeup should be used. The products containing the following ingredients should be avoided: 
Alcohol
Camphor
Fragrance
Glycolic acid
Lactic acid
Menthol
Sodium lauryl sulfate (often found in shampoos and toothpaste)
Urea
Witch Hazel
To reduce irritation, it’s also best to:
Use a cream instead of lotion or gel
Creams containing allantoin
Avoid astringent or toner
Test skin care products
Individuals having rosacea should test skin care products before applying to the face. This can be done by applying a very small amount of product near rosacea prone skin. The product should be avoided if it irritates the skin within 72 hours. 

Consider cosmetic camouflage
Makeup products like green color correctors can be used to mask or camouflage the red appearance of the skin in rosacea patients.

And last but not the least! Cope with mental stress
Rosacea has a significant psychosocial impact due to the changes in the appearance of the individual. It has an overall impact on self-esteem which can lead to anxiety and embarrassment in some individuals.
Studies suggest that rosacea affects 77.7% patients emotionally, 67% patients socially and 53% are affected in their relationships and dating behavior. 
The following measures might help: 
Engage yourself in activities you like such as crafting, painting, and singing
Do regular exercise as it helps in reducing stress
Join any support group either online or offline
Ask help from a professional counselor
Meet someone who is undergoing the same type of treatment
Be patient. Even with treatment, it may take months for rosacea to clear up. 
Be diligent. Rosacea will be quick to return if you're not careful about sun protection. So, long-term maintenance requires an ongoing commitment to protecting your skin.
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does it take for rosacea to improve?
Is rosacea contagious?
Can rosacea be diagnosed before you have a major flare-up?
How long does rosacea last?
Is oily skin common for rosacea sufferers?
Are rosacea sufferers more likely to get skin cancer later in life?
References
Rosacea Resource Center, American Academy Of Dermatology Association, AAD.
Rosacea, NIH, National Institute Of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin, Last Updated On: May 2021.
Mikkelsen CS, Holmgren HR, Kjellman P, Heidenheim M, Kappinnen A, Bjerring P, Huldt-Nystrøm T. Rosacea: a Clinical Review. Dermatol Reports. 2016 Jun 23;8(1):6387. doi: 10.4081/dr.2016.6387. PMID: 27942368; PMCID: PMC5134688.
Zhang H, Tang K, Wang Y, Fang R, Sun Q. Rosacea Treatment: Review and Update. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2021 Feb;11(1):13-24. doi: 10.1007/s13555-020-00461-0. Epub 2020 Nov 10. PMID: 33170491; PMCID: PMC7858727.
Sarkar R, Podder I, Jagadeesan S. Rosacea in skin of color: A comprehensive review. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol 2020;86:611-621.
Farshchian M, Daveluy's. Rosacea. [Updated 2023 Apr 19]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.
van Zuuren, E.J., Arents, B.W.M., van der Linden, M.M.D. et al. Rosacea: New Concepts in Classification and Treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol 22, 457–465 (2021).
Mikkelsen, Carsten & Holmgren, Helene & Kjellman, Petra & Stangeland, Katarina & Karpinnen, Ari & Heidenheim, Michael & Nystrøm, Theis & Bjerring, Peter. (2016). Rosacea - review.
Weather, Rosacea Society, National Rosacea Society, Last Updated On:
Rosacea, National Institute Of Dall'Oglio F, Fusto C, Micali G. Intrafamilial Transmission of Rosacea Spanning Six Generations: A Retrospective Observational Study. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2022 Feb;15(2):35-39. PMID: 35309876; PMCID: PMC8884184.
Rainer BM, Kang S, Chien AL. Rosacea: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and treatment. Dermatoendocrinol. 2017 Oct 4;9(1):e1361574. doi: 10.1080/19381980.2017.1361574. PMID: 29484096; PMCID: PMC5821167.
Goswami PK, Samant M, Srivastava R. Natural sunscreen agents: A review. Sch. Acad. J. Pharm. 2013;2(6):458-63.
Donglikar MM, Deore SL. Sunscreens: A review. Pharmacognosy Journals. 2016;8(3).
Latha MS, Martis J, Shobha V, Shinde RS, Bangera S, Krishnankutty B, Bellary S, Varughese S, Rao P, Kumar BN. Sunscreening agents: a review. The Journal of clinical and aesthetic dermatology. 2013 Jan;6(1):16.
Gabros S, Nessel TA, Zito PM. Sunscreens and Photoprotection. [Updated 2023 Mar 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls.
Yang, X. Relationship between Helicobacter pylori and Rosacea: review and discussion. BMC Infect Dis 18, 318 (2018).
Weiss E, Katta R. Diet and rosacea: the role of dietary change in the management of rosacea. Dermatology practical & conceptual. 2017 Oct;7(4):31.
Gether L, Overgaard LK, Egeberg A, Thyssen JP. Incidence and prevalence of rosacea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermato. (2018) 179:282–9. doi: 10.1111/bjd.16481
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.