Food poisoning
Also known as Foodborne illness and Foodborne disease
Overview
Food poisoning refers to the sickness experienced after eating contaminated food. The source of contamination in most cases is bacteria. However, it can also be caused by toxins or chemicals that may contaminate the food during its production, processing, harvesting, cooking, or storing. 

The classical symptoms of food poisoning include diarrhea, stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Children, elderly, pregnant women, and individuals with low immunity are at high risk of food poisoning. Most cases of food poisoning can be prevented by basic hand hygiene, sanitation of the kitchen and refrigerator, and storing the food as per the recommendations. 
  Food poisoning can be usually treated at home by maintaining the fluid and electrolyte balance through regular intake of clean boiled water, oral rehydration solution (ORS), coconut water, clear soups and fresh fruit juices. In cases of severe dehydration, hospital admission might be required.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children under 5 years of age
Elderly above 65 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Small Intestine
Large Intestine
Nervous system
Prevalence
India: 13.2% (2015)
Global: 7.69% (2021)
Mimicking Conditions
Coumaphos intoxications 
Inflammatory bowel disease
Peptic ulcer disease
Bowel obstruction
Cholecystitis
Irritable bowel syndrome
Lactose intolerance
Celiac disease
Acute HIV infection
Colorectal cancer
Necessary health tests/imaging
Blood tests
Urine test
Stool analysis
Abdominal X-ray
Abdominal ultrasound
Treatment
Fluid therapy: Water, Oral rehydration solution, Saline solution & Lactate Ringer’s solution.
Antibiotics: Metronidazole, Ceftriaxone & Azithromycin
Antiemetics: Ondansetron & Metoclopramide 
Anti-diarrheal medications: Diphenoxylate & Loperamide
See All
Symptoms Of Food poisoning 

The symptoms of food poisoning range from mild to severe. The symptoms can start appearing from a few hours to several weeks later after having contaminated food. In most cases, symptoms resolve on their own or with the right home care within a few days of contracting the infection. 
Early signs 
These symptoms are the first to appear and are common to most types of food poisoning. These include:
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Dull stomach ache, cramps, or a sharp pain
  Dealing with constant stomach aches? Here are some of the causes of stomach ache along with the information about when to consult a doctor.
Read To Know

The other symptoms might include:
Headache
Dizziness
Intense thirst
Diarrhea which may contain blood or mucus
Dehydration
Decreased urination
Cold and clammy skin
Slow pulse
Fever
Chills
Muscle ache
Lack of energy
Loss of appetite

Individuals can also experience several long-term severe symptoms in some cases which include:
Reactive arthritis (sometimes known as Reiter's Syndrome)
Severe vomiting
Profuse watery diarrhea
Severe dehydration
Confusion
Seizures
Muscle weakness
Double vision
Slurred speech

Did you know?
Stomach flu/viral gastroenteritis and food poisoning often share similar symptoms. The difference lies in the transmission. Stomach flu is mostly caused by viruses and is transmitted from person to person while food poisoning is caused by the ingestion of contaminated food and water. 
Causes Of Food poisoning 
  Food poisoning is caused by the contamination of food by either microbes or any other toxins. 
A. Microbial contamination
1. Bacteria: It is the most common cause of food poisoning. The symptoms and severity of the infection depend upon the type of bacteria that has contaminated the food. Some of the bacteria that cause food poisoning are:
Campylobacter: These bacteria usually contaminate raw/undercooked meat, raw milk, and contaminated water. The incubation period (time between exposure of bacteria to the onset of symptoms) is 2-5 days. The symptoms of this infection generally last for a week.
Salmonella: The contaminated raw/undercooked meat, raw eggs, milk, and other dairy products are the main sources of these bacteria. The symptoms start appearing between 12 to 72 hours. 
Listeria: These bacteria are found in “ready-to-eat” foods such as pre-packed sandwiches, hot dogs, cooked sliced meats, and soft cheeses. The symptoms can appear from a few days to several days. The food poisoning usually resolves within 3 days.
Note of caution: Pregnant women are 10 times more likely than other people to get Listeria infection. It can cause complications such as miscarriage, stillbirth, or premature birth.
Escherichia coli (E. coli): These bacteria normally inhabit the intestines of several animals and humans. Most of their types are harmless but some of them can cause food poisoning. The bacteria contaminate food such as undercooked beef and unpasteurized milk. Symptoms usually start appearing within 1 to 8 days of contracting the bacteria and last for a few days. 
Shigella: Any food such as fruits and vegetables washed in contaminated water can be exposed to shigella. Symptoms typically develop within seven days of eating contaminated food and last for up to a week.
Bacillus cereus: This microorganism mainly develops in improperly stored food. The infection with Bacillus is characterized by diarrhea and vomiting. 
Staphylococcus: It is most commonly found in undercooked meats, eggs, and dairy products. 
 Vibrio: This type of bacteria are commonly found in coastal water and can contaminate oysters, fish, and shellfish. Symptoms can start appearing 1 day after infection and usually resolves in 3 days. 
Clostridium: This bacteria contaminates food that is cooked in large batches. The common food items that may contain this bacteria include poultry and meat. 

Other less common microbes

1. Parasites: Parasites are the organisms that drive their nutritional requirements from other living organisms. The symptoms of food poisoning caused by parasites develop within 10 days of exposure to the parasite. The common examples of parasites that cause food poisoning are:
Giardia intestinalis
Cryptosporidium
Entamoeba histolytica
2. Viruses: The viruses that can cause food poisoning spread through contaminated water. It can also spread via a person infected with the virus while preparing or handling food. The common viruses that cause food poisoning include: 
Rotavirus
Adenovirus
Parvovirus
3. Fungi: There are several fungi that may cause food poisoning. Some fungi produce harmful chemicals that contaminate foods. The common examples of fungi that can cause food poisoning are:
Alternaria
Aspergillus
Candida
Fusarium
B. Non-microbial
In some cases, harmful chemicals are already present in the food which can cause food poisoning. Fish and shellfish may contain toxins produced by algae or bacteria present in water. 
Unwashed produce may also cause food poisoning due to the presence of pesticides used during crop production.
The contaminants can be of: 
Vegetable origin (Mushrooms)
Animal origin (Shellfish)
Chemicals (Flavouring agent, coloring agent, and preservatives)
How does the food get contaminated?
Food is not only contaminated in the kitchen. It can be exposed to contamination during its production, harvesting, processing, storing, shipping and preparation. 
Microbes can cause food poisoning if they are not washed off or killed before consuming. The following things can keep the microbes alive to cause food poisoning:
Consuming partially cooked food
Keeping cooked food unrefrigerated for a long period
Storing packaged food at the wrong temperature 
Promptly refrigerating hot food
Keeping raw foods such as beef, poultry, and eggs together with ready-to-eat foods

The microbes of food poisoning can also spread through an infected person via:
Eating food that is touched by the infected person
Cross-contamination (where harmful bacteria are spread between food, surfaces and equipment)
Sometimes, food poisoning can also occur through having ready-made contaminated food
Touching contaminated surfaces and objects such as handrails, elevator buttons, utensils, and doors while eating or handling food
Sharing food and beverages with the infected person
Did you know?
Salt and sugar can contain chalk powder as an adulterant. It can be identified by dissolving a teaspoon of salt / Sugar in a glass of water. If it is pure, it will dissolve. If chalk is present, it will sink to the bottom. Find out more tips to expose the hidden poison in commonly used food items that can lead to food poisoning and other health hazards.
Read To Know!
Risk Factors For Food poisoning 

Any individual can suffer from food poisoning but there are some groups of people that are more prone to it. These people include:
1. Children younger than 5 years of age
Children have an underdeveloped immune system so the chances of getting any infection is higher in them. Food poisoning can cause severe diarrhea and dehydration in children. It is also seen that children are 3 times more prone to be hospitalized if they get Salmonella infection.
  Looking for some multivitamins and minerals that boost immunity for your kids?? They are just a click away from you.
Order Now
2. Pregnant women 
Pregnant women are more prone to food poisoning. Studies suggest that pregnant women are 10 times more likely to get a Listeria infection. 
3. Older people above 65 years of age
The immune system of older people is compromised due to which the chances of infections in these groups of people are high. 
4. People with weakened immune system
Some individuals have a weakened immune system which can be a cause of recurrent food poisoning. The disorders that can contribute to the weakened immune system include:
Diabetes
Liver disease
Kidney disease
Cancer
HIV infection
5. Consuming certain food 
There are some food items that are more prone to microbial contamination and thus food poisoning. Such items include raw meat, unpasteurized milk, fish, shellfish, eggs, poultry, cheese, raw fruits, vegetables, nuts, spices, beef, salad, seafood, sprouts, and raw flour. The frequent consumption of such foods increases the risk of food poisoning. 
6. Other factors
Purchasing food from unauthorized sources
Cooking the food at the wrong temperature
Storing the food without refrigeration
Practicing poor personal hygiene such as not washing hands before eating or serving food
Using contaminated food and utensils.
  Up your stomach care game by a notch with our widest range of products to look after your stomach and help you get better faster if you are suffering from food poisoning.
Shop Them Here


Diagnosis Of Food poisoning 

There are no specific tests to diagnose food poisoning. In most of the cases, symptoms are mild and last for a few hours. In case of severe poisoning, the following steps can help your doctor determine cause of your food poisoning:
1. History taking
It is the first step to establishing food poisoning. Your doctors will ask for a set of questionnaires to identify the agent of food poisoning. The questions can be asked regarding:
Recent meal that you have taken
Recent place of travel, if any
Other people you know having similar symptoms
Medicines you are taking

Your doctor also asks about the symptoms you are experiencing. This information helps in establishing the cause and type of food poisoning.
2. Physical examination
It is done to see the changes in the body as per the symptoms experienced. During a physical exam, your doctor may: 
Examine the blood pressure to check the signs of dehydration
Check the temperature to confirm fever
Assess the abdomen using a stethoscope
Inspect any tenderness or pain in the abdomen through tapping.
3. Laboratory tests
The type of contaminant is diagnosed through several tests. The microbial contaminant is assessed using samples of blood, urine, vomit or stool. It also reveals the severity of poisoning. It usually include following tests: 
Stool tests: The stool is examined for the presence of bacteria, parasites or blood.
Blood test: Blood tests are performed to look for any sign of complications such as dehydration and kidney abnormalities. It includes assessing the level of electrolytes and other markers of kidney function. 
Urine test: It is also done to look for bacterial infection. 
4. Imaging tests 
Abdominal ultrasound: This imaging test look at organs in the abdomen, including the intestine, liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, and kidneys. It is an extremely useful imaging modality for evaluating the patient with acute abdominal symptoms.
Abdominal X-ray: In some cases of poisoning, an abdominal x-ray may check the presence and location of the ingested substances. Toxins that may be visible on x-rays include iron, lead, arsenic, and other metals. 
  Get your lab tests done in the comfort and safety of your home.
Book with Tata 1mg
Celebs affected
Manisha Koirala
She is an Indian actress who revealed her story of food poisoning through her blogs. She managed her condition through homemade soups and green tea.
Miranda Lambert
She is an American actress. She reportedly developed a severe case of food poisoning after eating shrimp.
Specialist To Visit 

Food poisoning often resolves on its own without seeking medical advice. The specialty of doctor that may help in diagnosing and treating food poisoning include: 
General physician
Gastroenterologist
Pediatrician (for kids)

A gastroenterologist is a specialist in the disorders and diseases that affect the digestive system. A pediatrician is a doctor who deals with the diseases of children. 
When to see a doctor?
Some symptoms of food poisoning should not be ignored. Consult your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms:
Persistent vomiting or diarrhea for more than three days
Inability to keep fluids down for a day or longer
Watery or bloody diarrhea
Fever higher than 102 degrees
Signs of dehydration 
Any sign of dehydration should not be ignored. The sign of dehydration include:
Extreme thirst
Dry mouth
Dark urine
Infrequent urination
Dizziness
Tiredness

To get the right diagnosis, it is important to consult the right doctor. Get advice from India’s best doctors online.
Talk Now


Prevention of Food poisoning 

Food poisoning can be prevented by practicing hygiene while storing, handling or preparing food. The following measures can reduce the chances of food poisoning:
A. Follow safe practices
1. While buying food items
Buy foods such as meat and seafood from hygienic outlets
Do not buy food items whose expiry has elapsed
Do not purchase undercooked or raw meats
Buy only pasteurized (heat treated to kill the disease-causing microbes) milk and cheese
Do not buy cracked or leaked eggs
Choose fresh fruits and vegetables
Check for any damage, rusk or dent on cans while buying beverages
Take frozen and refrigerated items from an authentic grocery store
2. While storing food
Keep raw meat, poultry and seafood in separate bags during refrigeration to avoid cross-contamination 
Keep the temperature of the main section below 4oC
Store the food as per the instructions on the label
Keep cooked leftovers quickly in the refrigerator
Keep raw cereals and dough away from the reach of children
3. While cooking and handling food
Do not leave cut vegetables and fruits uncovered 
Cook the food thoroughly
Cook the eggs until both the yolk and white are firm
Discard the food in case of a suspicious look and smell
Make sure that the food is steaming all the way through while reheating
Avoid reheating food more than once
4. While traveling
Drink only boiled or bottled water
Avoid eating raw vegetables and salads
Avoid buying food from unhygienic vendors
5. While dining out 
Avoid taking dishes that contain undercooked eggs, sprouts, meat, poultry, or seafood
B. Maintain proper hygiene
Wash your hands, counters, and cutting surfaces between preparation of different foods
Use glass or plastic cutting boards for chopping vegetables or meat instead of wooden boards for ease of cleaning
Wash fresh fruits and vegetables under running water
Avoid contact with sick persons while handling or preparing food
Ensure sanitation of the painting floors, utensils, and other articles in the kitchen

The first step in maintaining hygiene is having clean hands. Hand Washing can prevent about 30% of diarrhea-related illnesses. Learn the right way of washing your hands!
Read To Know
C. Clean the refrigerator frequently
The refrigerator should be cleaned thoroughly along with removable parts. The following measures should be taken while cleaning refrigerator:
Dispose off the contaminated food in a garbage bag
Wash the container in which contaminated food was stored with soap and water
Avoid leaving food out of the refrigerator for more than 2 hours
Treatment of Food poisoning 

The treatment of food poisoning is based upon the cause and symptoms. The most important goal of the therapy is to maintain hydration and electrolyte balance.
Fluid therapy
Most cases of mild dehydration can easily be managed at home through fluid therapy.
It is advised to drink plenty of fluids like water, coconut water to compensate for water loss and prevent dehydration. 
Oral rehydration solutions(ORS) are preferred over other clear fluids for managing diarrhea.
Patients having severe dehydration and persistent vomiting may require hospital admission for continuous monitoring of electrolyte levels. 
Enteral (oral or nasogastric) and intravenous fluids (saline solution and lactate Ringer’s solutions) are given to patients facing difficulty in taking fluids due to nausea, vomiting, and to correct electrolyte levels. 

Medications
Antibiotics: They are mostly used to treat food poisoning caused by bacteria. Some of the commonly used antibiotics are: 
Metronidazole
Ceftriaxone
Azithromycin

Antiemetics: Antiemetic medications are the drugs that are used to control nausea and vomiting. The commonly used antiemetic medications are:
Ondansetron
Metoclopramide

Antidiarrheal medications: These are drugs that relieve symptoms of diarrhea. These are used only in those patients who are not able to maintain a well-hydrated status. Medications include: 
Diphenoxylate
Loperamide

Ordering medicines is made easier with India’s largest and most trusted online pharmacy.
Upload your prescription
Home Care For Food poisoning 

1. Keep a watch on fluid intake
It is advised to have plenty of fluids like fresh fruit juices, coconut water, clear soups etc. In case of severe vomiting, take small sips of fluids at regular intervals. The mothers of the infected infants should make sure that their babies are getting enough breast milk. 
2. Have ice chips
If you are facing difficulty in digesting fluids, try to suck ice chips. This also helps in rehydration. The ice chips should not be given to small children. 
3. Consume BRAT diet
B.R.A.T stands for bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. These food items should be included in the diet as it helps in making the stool smooth and helps in compensating the nutrient loss from vomiting and diarrhea.
It is also advised to consume smaller easy to digest meals at regular intervals.
4. Try herbal remedies
In most of the cases, food poisoning can be managed by simple home remedies like:
Ginger (Adrak): It possesses anti-inflammatory, anti-viral, and anti-bacterial properties. It also eases nausea. It can be taken in raw form or can be boiled in water or tea. 
Apple cider vinegar (ACV): It can soothe an irritated stomach and thereby reduce nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps. Add 1 teaspoon of apple cider vinegar to a glass of warm water and drink 30 minutes before eating a meal.
  Order ACV from the comfort of your home.
Tap here!

Yogurt (Dahi): It contains a lot of good bacteria that help in maintaining the overall good health of the gut. It also helps in reducing watery diarrhea. It should be added to every meal of the patient suffering from food poisoning. 
Cinnamon (Dalchini): It has antibacterial and antiviral properties which can be used for combating food poisoning. It also helps in reducing stomach pain and bloating. 
Turmeric (Haldi): Curcumin, present in turmeric, possesses anti-inflammatory properties. It can be consumed by adding a glass of warm water or milk. 

Looking for some turmeric products?
Shop Now!

Basil (Tulsi): It possesses antispasmodic properties and helps in reducing spasms in food poisoning. It also has gastroprotective properties which aid in relieving symptoms of food poisoning. 
Peppermint (Pudina): It soothes the stomach and helps in treating bloating and gas. The most effective way to use it is to consume it in the form of tea. 
Triphala: It is known to improve digestive health and also helps in the absorption of nutrients. 
Coriander (Dhania): It possesses healing properties and it is known to alleviate the symptoms of upset stomach and diarrhea.
Asafoetida (Hing): It is known for years to strengthen the digestive system. It possesses antiviral and antibacterial properties. It can be added in meals or can be consumed with lukewarm water. 
Licorice (Mulethi): It also promotes the healing of an inflamed stomach and treats indigestion. 
Rice water: It is used especially in infants to reduce diarrhea. 
Chamomile tea: It is used as a digestive relaxant and can help in the treatment of many gastrointestinal disturbances, like diarrhea and vomiting, which is most commonly observed in food poisoning. 

Did you know?
Probiotics are not just good for your gut, they boost immunity as well. The good bacteria present in probiotics check the growth of harmful microorganisms and prevent illness. 
Explore probiotics here
5. Avoid certain foods
Certain food items should be avoided as they can make the stomach upset and can cause indigestion. The impaired digestion can aggravate diarrhea and vomiting. These include:
Milk
Greasy and spicy food containing chilly, black pepper, and garlic 
Drinks with caffeine, such as coffee and tea, and soft drinks.
Fatty junk foods such as fried foods, pizza, and fast foods.
Foods and drinks containing large amounts of simple sugars, such as sweetened beverages and packaged fruit juices.
6. Take proper rest
People should take proper rest even after the completion of therapy. This will lead to complete recovery and healing of the digestive system. 
7. Try heating pad 
Some patients suffer from severe abdominal pain. Such patients can use a heating pad to relieve cramps. 
8. Say no to alcohol
Alcohol can cause inflammation in the stomach. This can increase the secretion of gastric acid. So, alcohol should be avoided as it can increase the feeling of vomiting (nausea).
Complications of Food poisoning 

Untreated food poisoning can lead to the following complications :
Chronic diarrhea
Inflammatory bowel disease (condition in which there is an inflammation of small intestine and large intestine) 
Irritable bowel syndrome (condition characterized by abdominal pain)
Arthritis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (a kidney condition that happens when red blood cells are destroyed and block the function of the kidney)
Guillain-Barre syndrome (neurological disorder in which immune system attack the nervous system)
Nervous system infections such as meningitis.
Frequently Asked Questions
What can be eaten during food poisoning?
What foods to avoid during food poisoning?
Can food poisoning be serious?
Do symptoms of food poisoning can be mistaken for any other illness?
Why is Listeria dangerous for pregnant women?
References
A Review Article On Food Poisoning, Dr. Jagdish Kumar Anant, Dr. S.R. Inchulkar, Dr. Sangeeta Bhagat, World Journal Of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences, Last Updated On: 28th August 2018.
Food Safety, Center For Disease Control And Prevention, Last Updated On: 27th February, 2022.
Food Poisoning, NHS Inform, Last Updated On: 22 February 2023.
Aljamali NM. Review on food poisoning (types, causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment). Global Academic Journal of Pharmacy and Drug Research. 2021;3(4):54-61.
Food Poisoning, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Health.
Show Me the Science – Why Wash Your Hands? Handwashing in Communities: Clean Hands Save Lives. Centre for Disease Control and Prevention.
Sultana R et al. A Review Article on Food Poisoning. International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR).ISSN: 2319-7064. SJIF (2022): 7.942. Volume 11 Issue 6, June 2022.
Benedict K, Chiller TM, Mody RK. Invasive Fungal Infections Acquired from Contaminated Food or Nutritional Supplements: A Review of the Literature. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2016 Jul;13(7):343-9. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2015.2108. Epub 2016 Apr 13. PMID: 27074753; PMCID: PMC5669373.
Lubis NDA, Amelia S, Arrasyid NK, Rozi MF. Modeling of Risk Factors Associated with Foodborne Disease among School-Aged Children in Medan, Indonesia. Open Access Maced J Med Sci. 2019 Oct 12;7(19):3302-3306. doi: 10.3889/oamjms.2019.721. PMID: 31949535; PMCID: PMC6953940.
Sockett PN, Rodgers FG. Enteric and foodborne disease in children: A review of the influence of food- and environment-related risk factors. Paediatr Child Health. 2001 Apr;6(4):203-9. doi: 10.1093/pch/6.4.203. PMID: 20084237; PMCID: PMC2804543.
Kohli C, Garg S. Food safety in India: an unfinished agenda. MAMC Journal of Medical Sciences. 2015 Sep 1;1(3):131.
Lee H, Yoon Y. Etiological Agents Implicated in Foodborne Illness World Wide. Food Sci Anim Resour. 2021 Jan;41(1):1-7. doi: 10.5851/kosfa.2020.e75. Epub 2021 Jan 1. PMID: 33506212; PMCID: PMC7810395.
People with a high risk of food poisoning, Center For Disease Control And Prevention, Last Updated On: 10th August, 2022.
Bacillus cereus, BC Center for Disease Control. http://www.bccdc.ca/health-info/diseases-conditions/bacillus-cereus#:~:text=Definition,ingestion%20of%20the%20contaminated%20food.
Vibrio and Food, Center For Disease Control And Prevention, Last Updated On: 23 December, 2019.
Prevent Illness From C. perfringens, Center For Disease Control And Prevention, Last Updated On: 24 March , 2023.
Kohli C, Garg S. Food safety in India: an unfinished agenda. MAMC Journal of Medical Sciences. 2015 Sep 1;1(3):131.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.