Vomiting
Also known as Throwing up, Spewing, Retching, Puking, Barfing, Regurgitating, and Chundering
Overview

Vomiting, or throwing up, is a forceful discharge of the contents of the stomach through the mouth. It isn’t a condition, but rather a symptom of many other conditions. While some of these conditions can be serious, most aren’t a cause for major concern. It can be a one-time event linked to something that doesn’t settle right in your stomach. However, recurrent vomiting may be caused by an underlying medical condition.

Every person experiences vomiting at least once in their lifetime. Causes of vomiting in adults can be the use of certain medicines, pregnancy, drinking too much alcohol, infections, a blockage in your bowel, and chemotherapy. In children, the causes include swallowing milk too rapidly, viral infections, intolerance to milk, and certain food allergies.

Recurrent vomiting can be due to some other health disorder that needs to be addressed and treated. Treatment or management mainly consists of avoiding known triggers of vomiting, drinking a lot of fluids to avoid dehydration, and taking antiemetic medications.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both male and female, but more common in women.
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Food pipe (Oesophagus)
Mimicking Conditions
Nausea
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Necessary health tests/imaging
Laboratory tests:
 Complete blood count (CBC)
 Serum electrolytes
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone(TSH)
Imaging tests: 
Abdominal radiography
Computed tomography (CT)
Abdominal ultrasonography (USG) 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Treatment
Antiemetic drugs: 
Diphenhydramine
Hydroxyzine
Promethazine
Prochlorperazine
Metoclopramide
Ondansetron
Specialists to consult
General physician
Pediatrician 
Gastroenterologist
Symptoms Of Vomiting

Vomiting is a common gastrointestinal complaint that can be triggered by a lot of stimuli and it is considered a defense mechanism against toxins, drugs, bacteria, viruses, and fungi that enter the body. Symptoms associated with vomiting include:
Nausea
Abdomen distension
Diarrhea
Fever
Lightheadedness
Vertigo
Increased heart rate
Excessive sweating
Dryness of the mouth
Decreased urination
Chest pain
Fainting
Confusion
Excessive sleepiness

Have you been vomiting quite frequently?
Know what can cause vomiting and when to visit a doctor.
Enlighten Yourself Now

Causes Of Vomiting

During vomiting, the major muscles in between the neck and stomach contract at the same time. This puts pressure on the stomach, expelling the contents in the stomach up the throat and through your mouth. The most common causes of vomiting include:

Gastroenteritis
Acute viral gastroenteritis is an intestinal infection caused by various viruses. It is a major cause of vomiting. Other signs and symptoms include diarrhea, stomach cramps, nausea, and sometimes fever.
Food poisoning
If you eat food that is contaminated or stale, it can lead to food poisoning. It is caused due to multiplication of bacteria in the food which produces toxins in the body. 
Food poisoning commonly causes vomiting. Other symptoms include nausea, and stomach cramping, with or without diarrhea.
Inner ear infections
Also known as labyrinthitis, it can cause vomiting that is commonly accompanied by dizziness and a feeling of spinning (vertigo).
Motion sickness
Motion sickness is a sensation of throwing up while traveling by road, air, or sea. The movement of the vehicle causes turbulence as a result of which the inner ear loses its balance and causes nausea and vomiting.

Want to travel but scared of motion sickness? We have got you covered.
Read some effective tips and tricks to avoid motion sickness.
Click Here
Pregnancy
Pregnant women typically endure repeated episodes of nausea and vomiting, particularly during the first trimester of pregnancy called "morning sickness". 

Is a baby on the way?
Pregnancy is a special and precious time for every woman. However, with so many changes happening in the female body, it comes with its own share of ups and downs.
Here are 5 tips to make you easy to sail through your pregnancy.
Click Here To Read
Appendicitis
Appendicitis is an inflammation of the appendix (a thin pouch that connects to the large intestine). This can cause pain that tends to move to the right or lower right side of the stomach. Nausea and vomiting are often associated with appendicitis.
Gallstones
Gallstones are hardened deposits of digestive fluid that can form in gallbladder (a small, pear-shaped organ on the right side of the abdomen that holds a digestive fluid called bile). Gallstones can lead to severe abdominal pain that can cause vomiting.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
It is a condition in which stomach acid repeatedly flows back into the tube connecting your mouth and stomach. This can lead to nausea and even vomiting in some cases.

Migraines
These are a type of headaches that can cause severe throbbing pain or a pulsing sensation, usually on one side of the head. They are usually accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound.

Struggling with migraine?
Watch our expert, a leading neurologist decode it for you.
Browse Here


Medications
Nausea and vomiting are common side effects of many medications. These include antibiotics, vitamins, birth control pills, analgesics, and antidepressants. So talk to your doctor if you feel nauseated after taking any medications. He/she might consider changing the medications.

Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is a debilitating side effect of cancer treatment, affecting up to 40% of patients.

Concussion
It is a traumatic brain injury that affects your brain function. It is of utmost importance to seek emergency care if you experience repeated vomiting or nausea after a head injury.

Crohn’s disease
It is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) that causes swelling of the tissues in your digestive tract. It can cause a narrowing of the intestine that prevents food from normally traveling through the digestive tract, causing nausea and vomiting.

Other causes of vomiting
These may include:
Bowel obstruction
Menstruation
Excessive alcohol consumption
Anxiety
Intense pain
Kidney infections and stones
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Food allergies
Exposure to toxins

Did you know?
Nausea and vomiting also occur in about 20-30% of postoperative patients as a complication of anesthesia. The term PONV is typically used to describe nausea and/or vomiting in the immediate 24 postoperative hours. Postdischarge nausea and vomiting (PDNV) refer to symptoms that occur after discharge for outpatient procedures.


Causes of vomiting in babies
Common causes of vomiting in babies may include:
Viral gastroenteritis
Swallowing milk too quickly
Food allergies
Milk intolerance
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Middle ear infections
Pneumonia
Meningitis
Ingesting toxic substances accidentally
Congenital pyloric stenosis (a condition present at birth that causes narrowing of the passage between stomach and bowel)
Blockages in the bowel.

Is your child vomiting?
Here are some important things to remember when your child has one or multiple episodes of vomiting.
Click To Read
Diagnosis Of Vomiting

Vomiting can be a symptom of many causes, sometimes it can be as simple as indigestion and sometimes it can be due to an underlying disorder. Though the diagnosis of vomiting can be simple, its cause should not be neglected and every possibility must be evaluated. Diagnosis mainly consist of:
1. Medical history
Past history is very important in determining the cause of vomiting. Questions such as onset duration and frequency, any chronic illness, the timing of vomiting, and associated symptoms must be asked to get a thorough understanding of the reason behind vomiting.

2. Physical examination
The physical examination is focused initially on signs of dehydration, including, evaluation of fingers for calluses that are suggestive of self-induced vomiting.

Signs of depression or anxiety which may suggest psychiatric causes need to be evaluated.
 
Abdominal examination is extremely important as it can detect distention with a tenderness that can be suggestive of a bowel obstruction.

3. Laboratory tests
Tests are directed by the history and physical examination to determine the underlying cause or to evaluate for the consequences of vomiting. These tests include:
Complete blood count (CBC): It is done to diagnose any changes in blood cell count.
Serum electrolytes: this test is done to check for acidosis (too much acid in the body fluids), alkalosis (excess base in body fluids), azotemia (build-up of nitrogen products in the blood), and hypokalemia ( deficiency of potassium in the blood)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR): To check for inflammation
Pancreatic/liver enzymes: For patients with upper abdominal pain or jaundice
Pregnancy test: In case of any female of childbearing age
Protein/albumin: In patients with chronic organic illness or malnutrition
Specific toxins: To check for any ingestion or use of potentially toxic medications
Thyroid-stimulating hormone(TSH): For patients with signs of thyroid toxicity or unexplained nausea and vomiting.

4. Imaging tests
Supine and upright abdominal radiography are done to check for small bowel or any other kind of obstruction. 

5. Other tests
Further testing may be needed to evaluate obstructions or any other cause. These tests may include:

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Computed tomography (CT) 
Abdominal ultrasonography (USG)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain

Book your tests now to clear out every possible cause for your recurrent vomiting episodes.
Click Here
Celebs affected
Kim Kardashian West
Kim Kardashian is an American media personality, socialite, and businesswoman. She battled with morning sickness during pregnancy and said in an interview "It's a very different type of pregnancy from my first one, but I'm so grateful to be pregnant when we didn't even think it was going to happen for us, [so] I don't care how sick I am."
Beyoncé
Beyoncé is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. In an interview with Harper's Bazaar, her best friend Gwyneth said “watching Queen Bey headline the Glastonbury Festival was special—and not only because of her performance. She was absolutely incredible, especially as she was barfing in between," she told the magazine.
Prevention Of Vomiting

The sequence before vomiting is nausea and when you begin feeling nauseous, there are a few steps you can take to potentially stop yourself from actually vomiting. The following tips that can prevent vomiting include:

Take deep breaths as soon as you begin to feel nauseous
Drink plenty of water and other liquids
Eat fresh or candied ginger or try ginger tea
If you are prone to motion sickness, take an OTC (over-the-counter) medication to stop vomiting
Suck on ice chips
Avoid oily or spicy foods if you have indigestion
Sit down or lie down with your head and back propped up
Do not consume an excess of alcohol
Do not sleep immediately after eating
Avoid staring at screens while traveling
Try to avoid any kind of activity when you feel nauseous

The most common cause of vomiting is a bad stomach.
Up your stomach care game from our widest range of products that can take care of your stomach.
Shop Now

Specialists To Visit

Vomiting can be caused due to several reasons. In case of frequent vomiting, doctors that can help you diagnose the exact cause and provide treatment include:

General physician
Pediatrician (in case of children)
Gastroenterologist

A gastroenterologist is a medical practitioner qualified to diagnose and treat disorders of the stomach and intestines.

When to see a doctor?
It is essential to see a doctor in case of the following symptoms:

In children:
Vomiting lasts more than a few hours
Diarrhea and signs of dehydration are present
Fever higher than 100 degrees Fahrenheit
Your child hasn't urinated for six hours

In adults:
Blood in the vomit
Severe headache along with stiff neck
Fatigue 
Confusion and disorientation
Severe abdominal pain
Fever over 101 degrees Fahrenheit
Diarrhea 
Rapid breathing or heart rate.

If you or your child have persistent vomiting, do not delay and get medical advice from our world-class doctors.
Consult Now

Treatment Of Vomiting

The basic management of vomiting is to avoid any environmental triggers such as crowded places, odors, and heat. Also, treating the underlying cause is important to stop the episodes of vomiting. 

However, nausea and vomiting can be very vigorous in individuals undergoing treatment for cancer, or who have undergone any kind of surgery. Treatment in such cases includes:

1. Antiemetic drugs
Antiemetics are drugs used to combat nausea and vomiting. These work by blocking the pathways involved in vomiting. Most commonly used antiemetics include:

Scopolamine
Diphenhydramine
Hydroxyzine
Promethazine
Prochlorperazine
Droperidol
Metoclopramide
Ondansetron

2. Newer agents
These agents work by blocking the action of a chemical messenger (neurokinin) in the brain that may cause nausea and vomiting during anti-cancer treatment (chemotherapy).
Aprepitant is the first of these agents to be introduced, but its efficacy is not yet established.

Note: Glucocorticoids (corticosteroids) such as dexamethasone are well-established antiemetics for chemotherapy-induced as well as postoperative nausea and vomiting.


Read more on dos and don'ts to follow while taking oral corticosteroids.
Click Now

Home-care For Vomiting

Vomiting can be a one-time affair or can happen regularly due to various reasons. However, the feeling is not quite welcoming and can take a toll on the mind and the body. The first and foremost step is to keep yourself hydrated. The following tips should be kept in mind for the management of vomiting in children:

Avoid solid foods for up to 24 hours in case of persistent vomiting.
Keep your child hydrated.
Lay your child on their side to minimize the chance of them inhaling vomit into their airways.
Do not try medications and alternative treatments without a doctor’s approval.

There are numerous tips to manage nausea and vomiting and some of the most effective home remedies include:
Ginger (Adrak): Ginger is a widely used herb for its many natural medicinal properties and particularly as an antiemetic. 
Lemon (Nimbu): According to studies, 40% of women have used lemon scent to relieve nausea and vomiting, and 26.5% of them have reported it as an effective way to control their symptoms.
Peppermint oil: It significantly reduces the frequency of nausea, vomiting, and retching.
Fennel (Sauf): It refreshes the flavor of your mouth and helps stop vomiting. You can have it as it is or as fennel seeds tea.
Cumin (Zeera): The powder and seeds of cumin are known to be effective in relieving nausea and vomiting. 
Cinnamon (Dalchini): It helps to reduce menstrual bleeding, nausea, and vomiting. Studies also showed significant improvements in gastrointestinal symptoms with cinnamon.

Feeling nauseated?
Try these 6 foods to get instant relief.
Read More Now

Complications Of Vomiting

In most cases, nausea and vomiting might clear up on their own unless there is an underlying chronic condition. Persistent vomiting can lead to the following complications:

Dehydration: May be caused by failure to replace obligate water losses and the most common causes are vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, etc.

Loss of enamel: Studies demonstrate that self-induced vomiting can lead to the erosion of the outer layer of teeth (enamel).
Alternative Therapies For Vomiting

Nausea and vomiting are distressing symptoms that may significantly detract from the overall quality of life and greatly influence an individual’s overall mood and social activities. Chronic vomiting can also be managed with alternative therapies that have shown some good results. These therapies include:
1. Acupuncture and acupressure
Acupuncture and acupressure are two techniques commonly used to manage chronic vomiting. During acupuncture, a therapist inserts thin needles into specific points on the body. Acupressure aims to stimulate the same points of the body but uses pressure instead of needles to do so. Both techniques stimulate nerve fibers, which transmit signals to the brain and spinal cord and some believe these signals can decrease nausea.

2. Aromatherapy therapy
This type of therapy may help relieve nausea and vomiting, although studies on its effectiveness are mixed. To practice aromatherapy, try deep breathing with an open essential oil bottle, or an essential oil diffuser, or add a few drops to a cotton ball. If you have asthma or another respiratory condition, ask your doctor before diffusing essential oils.

Buy essential oil products online to get rid of the unwelcoming feeling of nausea and vomiting. Fill your cart now.
Tap Here

3. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
According to TCM, vomiting is a manifestation of impaired homeostasis and reversed upward qi (in Chinese philosophy, qi, is the life force that every person and thing has) flow within the stomach, resulting in the expulsion of the stomach’s contents through the mouth.

This alternative therapy involves a variety of therapeutic techniques and the key to treatment lies in harmonizing the stomach and diminishing qi counter flow. 
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the difference between nausea and vomiting?
What is cyclic vomit syndrome?
What foods should be avoided during vomiting?
Which position is best in case of vomiting?
Can vomiting cause sore throat?
Why does Vomiting Occur?
References
Zhong W, Shahbaz O, Teskey G, Beever A, Kachour N, Venketaraman V, Darmani NA. Mechanisms of Nausea and Vomiting: Current Knowledge and Recent Advances in Intracellular Emetic Signaling Systems. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 28;22(11):5797.
Stuempfig ND, Seroy J. Viral Gastroenteritis. [Updated 2022 Jun 21]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-. Available from:
Islam S et al. Post-Operative Nausea And Vomiting (PONV): A Review Article. Indian J. Anaesth. 2004: PONV : A REVIEW; 48 (4): 253-258
Pepper GV, Craig Roberts S. Rates of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and dietary characteristics across populations. Proc Biol Sci. 2006 Oct 22;273(1601):2675-9
Argudín MÁ, Mendoza MC, Rodicio MR. Food poisoning and Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxins. Toxins (Basel). 2010 Jul;2(7):1751-73.
K. Gupta et al. Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting: Pathogenesis, Recommendations, and New Trends. Cancer Treatment and Research Communications 26 (2021) 100278.
Scorza K et al . Evaluation of Nausea and Vomiting. American Family Physician. July 1, 2007.Volume 76, Number 1.
Ibrahim. Nausea and Vomiting in Cancer Patients: Topic Review. J Palliat Care Med 2015, 5:1.
Becker DE. Nausea, vomiting, and hiccups: a review of mechanisms and treatment. Anesth Prog. 2010 Winter;57(4):150-6; quiz 157.
Andrews PLR, Cai W, Rudd JA, Sanger GJ. COVID-19, nausea, and vomiting. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021 Mar;36(3):646-656.
Lete I, Allué J. The Effectiveness of Ginger in the Prevention of Nausea and Vomiting during Pregnancy and Chemotherapy. Integr Med Insights. 2016 Mar 31;11:11-7.
Yavari Kia P, Safajou F, Shahnazi M, Nazemiyeh H. The effect of lemon inhalation aromatherapy on nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a double-blinded, randomized, controlled clinical trial. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2014 Mar;16(3):e14360.
Zobeiri M, Parvizi F, Shahpiri Z, et al. Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Cinnamon Oil Soft Capsule in Patients with Functional Dyspepsia: A Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2021;2021:6634115. Published 2021 May 13.
Taylor K, Jones EB. Adult Dehydration. [Updated 2022 Oct 3]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-. Available from:
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.