Leptospirosis
Overview
Leptospirosis is an infectious condition caused by a bacteria, Leptospira, that affects both humans and animals. While leptospirosis can occur worldwide, it is more common in tropical or subtropical regions. Outbreaks usually occur in monsoons, after heavy rainfall or flooding, particularly in areas with poor housing and sanitation.

The bacteria can be found in the urine of infected animals, such as rats, mice, livestock, and dogs, and can survive in soil and water for weeks to months. Human infection occurs through direct contact with infected animals or their urine, contact with urine-contaminated water and soil, or ingestion of contaminated food or water.

The symptoms of leptospirosis can vary widely, ranging from mild flu-like symptoms to severe illness. Common symptoms include high fever, headache, muscle aches, chills, vomiting, jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), and red eyes. 

Transmission can be prevented by avoiding walking, swimming, bathing, swallowing, or submerging head in potentially contaminated water especially after heavy rainfall or flooding. Drinking and preparing meals in only filtered or boiled water is also a must.

Treatment is generally based on the severity, and most commonly involves the administration of antibiotics which are effective in eliminating the bacteria.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Heart
Liver
Kidneys
Eyes
Lungs
Brain
Prevalence
World: 1.03 million cases (2018)
India: 0.1 - 1.0 million cases per year (2014)
Mimicking Conditions
Brucellosis
Dengue
Enterovirus infections
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Hepatitis A
Kawasaki disease
Malaria
Measles
Meningitis
Q fever
Necessary health tests/imaging
Blood tests: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), Liver functions tests, Kidney function tests, Peripheral blood smear.
Urine Analysis
Lumbar puncture
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Serological and other indirect methods: Microscopic agglutination test (MAT), Enzyme-Linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Indirect haemagglutination assay (IHA), and Lepto dipstick assay
Treatment
Antibiotics: Doxycycline, Amoxicillin,  Azithromycin, Ampicillin, Penicillin G, Ceftriaxone, Erythromycin.
Painkillers and antipyretics: Paracetamol, Ibuprofen, Naproxen
Other medical therapies: Mechanical ventilation and Dialysis.
See All
Symptoms Of Leptospirosis 

In humans, leptospirosis can cause a wide range of symptoms. The common symptoms of leptospirosis include:
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Sore throat
Loss of appetite
Abdominal pain
Conjunctivitis (irritation and redness of the eyes)
Cough
Short-lived rash
Jaundice (yellow skin and eyes)
Muscle aches
Shivering

Suffering from fever and headaches? Try our extensive range of products designed to alleviate your discomfort.
Stock up now

Symptoms in severe cases
Extreme fatigue
Hearing loss
Respiratory distress
Meningitis ( an infection of the meninges, protective tissue of the brain that causes stiff neck, headache, and fever)
Pulmonary hemorrhage (bleeding into the lower respiratory tract)

Note: The time between a person’s exposure to a contaminated source and becoming sick is 2 days to 4 weeks. The illness can last from a few days to 3 weeks or longer.

Phases of Leptospirosis 
Leptospirosis usually presents in the following phases:
1. Anicteric syndrome 
It is the most common form which is not very severe and shows symptoms similar to the flu. It starts suddenly and can cause a headache, cough, rash that doesn't itch, fever, shivering, muscle pain, loss of appetite, and diarrhea.
2. Immune phase
It refers to the progression of the disease where the body's immune system responds to the infection caused by the Leptospira bacteria. The anicteric syndrome can also have recurrence several days later, and this phase is called the immune stage. During this stage, aseptic meningitis (it is inflammation of the brain meninges that have negative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) bacterial cultures) can occur. 
3. Icteric phase
Also known as Weil's disease, it is a very serious infection that can last for several months and can cause a range of symptoms such as high fever, kidney failure, jaundice, bleeding in the lungs, and respiratory distress.
Causes Of Leptospirosis

Leptospirosis is caused by a bacteria called leptospira, which is found in the urine of infected animals. Animals like rodents, cattle, buffaloes, horses, sheep, goats, pigs, and dogs are considered common reservoirs of this bacteria. 
The bacteria can survive for weeks to months in urine-contaminated water and soil.
The common modes by which people can get infected include:
Direct contact with infected animals or their urine, reproductive fluids, or body tissues
Contact with urine-contaminated water from floods, rivers, streams, and sewage (especially during high rain or monsoon season that causes the spreading of bacteria)
Contact with urine-contaminated wet soil
Intake of food or water contaminated by urine or urine containing water

Transmission occurs through mucous membranes, conjunctiva, and nonintact skin like skin cuts or abrasions. The incubation period is usually 5–14 days, with a range of 2–30 days. 

Know how to monsoon-proof your health.
Read now


Risk Factors Of Leptospirosis

Understanding the risk factors of leptospirosis is crucial for preventing this bacterial infection. They include:
1. Occupation
Direct contact with animals and activities that can lead to skin abrasions and water or soil exposure, such as clearing brush, trekking, and gardening are associated with a high risk of leptospirosis. The occupations which are more susceptible include:
Sewage workers
Butchers
Farmers
Veterinarians
Hunters
Fish workers
Dairy farmers
Military personnel
2. Outdoor activities
Swimming, rafting, kayaking, wading, or boating in flood water or freshwater (rivers, streams, lakes) that may be contaminated with animal urine increase the risk of leptospirosis.
Prolonged immersion or submerging head, or swallowing contaminated water can particularly increase risk. 
3. Household exposure 
Potentially contaminated sources like pet dogs, domesticated livestock, rainwater catchment systems, and infestation by infected rodents can increase the risk of leptospirosis.
4. Low socioeconomic status
Living in overcrowded urban areas with poor sanitation is also a known risk factor for getting infected with this infection.
5. Travel to endemic areas 
Travel to areas with heavy rainfall or flooding can also lead to leptospirosis.
6. Mother-to-child transmission
An infected mother can transmit the infection to her baby during pregnancy or childbirth. It is important to seek medical care and take preventive measures to reduce the risk of transmission and protect both the mother and the baby.
  Did you know? 
Leptospirosis in pregnancy may be misdiagnosed as it can mimic other pregnancy-associated conditions, including infections, pregnancy-associated hypertension, acute fatty liver, and HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count syndrome). 
Diagnosis Of Leptospirosis 

Accurate diagnosis of leptospirosis is crucial for timely treatment and management of the disease, as early recognition allows for appropriate interventions and helps prevent potential complications. It consists of the following:
1. Medical history and physical examination
A doctor will ask whether a person may have acquired leptospirosis if he/she comes in contact with the urine of infected animals directly or through contaminated food, water, or soil. The doctor will also check for the occupation.
2. Blood tests 
The various blood tests available for the detection of leptospirosis include:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): It is a simple blood test that measures inflammation or any infection in the body. The ESR rate is elevated in the case of leptospirosis.
Peripheral blood smear: A blood smear is a basic test that is used to determine abnormalities in the blood. It may be helpful in differentiating leptospirosis from other common acute febrile illnesses.
Liver function tests: These are a group of tests to evaluate the functioning of the liver. In icteric leptospirosis, liver function tests (LFT) generally show a significant rise in bilirubin and other liver enzymes.
Kidney function tests: It is a group of tests that may be performed together to evaluate kidney (renal) function. The kidneys are usually impaired by raised plasma creatinine in leptospirosis.
3. Urine analysis
It's used to detect the leptospires in the urine which can be absent from the blood during the immune phase.
4. Lumbar puncture
 Also known as a spinal tap, it is a procedure used to collect a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for testing. It is done to isolate leptospirae from the cerebrospinal fluid.
5. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
It enables rapid and direct diagnosis of leptospirosis DNA, even in the early and convalescent stages of infection. 
6. Serological and other indirect methods 
Serological tests are diagnostic methods that are used to identify antibodies and antigens in a patient's sample. They include:
Microscopic agglutination test (MAT): MAT has been widely used as the reference test for antibody detection in leptospirosis. However, this tests would not be useful at the early stages of the disease.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA): ELISA is a modern molecular technique for the detection of antigen-antibody interaction. Many studies have demonstrated ELISA to be more sensitive than MAT for the detection of cases early in acute illness.
Indirect haemagglutination assay (IHA): IHA was shown to detect both IgM and IgG classes of antibodies produced in defense to fight against leptospira.
Leptodipstick assay: The LEPTO dipstick assay is a newly developed test for the diagnosis of leptospirosis by detecting antibodies.

Book your tests with Tata 1mg to get accurate results.
Click here to get tested

Prevention Of Leptospirosis 

Although human vaccines have been used in some countries with varying degrees of success, there are no WHO-prequalified vaccines currently available. The measures to prevent transmission of leptospirosis include the following:
Avoid exposure
Avoid walking, swimming, bathing, swallowing, or submerging head in potentially contaminated water bodies especially during monsoons, periods of heavy rainfall or flooding. 
Cover open wounds with waterproof dressings. 
Ensure safe drinking water 
Drink only filtered or boiled water
Use filtered or boiled water to prepare food, brush teeth, and make ice
Avoid using water bottles without a seal
Store water in a clean and covered container
Cook and consume food vigilantly
Prepare food in filtered or boiled water
Wash fruits and vegetables with filtered or boiled water
Consume fruits and vegetables after peeling
Use of PPE (Personal protective equipment)
Animal handlers should treat all animals as if they are infected and wear full protection (waterproof coveralls/ clothing, gloves) at all times.
Wear full-cover, waterproof boots or shoes that do not allow water to enter from the top.
Farm, agricultural and horticultural workers should treat all wet soil and vegetation as if it is contaminated and wear full protection, particularly after heavy rain. 
Chemoprophylaxis
Administration of doxycycline 200 mg, once a week, during the peak transmission season may be given to agricultural workers or high-risk individuals.
Rodent control
Rats are the main reservoirs for leptospirosis bacterium in India. Hence controlling these reservoir species with proper strategy planning and management planning will reduce the incidence of the disease. It includes:
Determining the host species responsible for the infection in the affected region
Defining specific areas for implementing rodent control measures
Conducting necessary activities before the onset of the monsoon season
Utilizing suitable technology for effective rodent control, ensuring accurate inputs and proper application methods.
Establishing a proper drainage system
The mapping of water bodies and human activities in water-logged areas should be
carried out. Farmers should be educated to drain out the urine from the cattle shed into a pit, instead of letting it flow and mix with rivers, ponds etc.
Tips to protect your pets
Keep your pets out of contaminated water, especially after heavy rainfall or flooding
Keep your pets away from other animal’s urine
Make sure your pets only drink clean filtered or boiled water
Keep your pets away from rodents, and wild animals
Vaccinate livestock and dogs. Vaccines are available for cattle, dogs, and pigs that provide short-term protection. 
Install suitable fencing that separates livestock from access to potentially contaminated bodies of water (e.g. valley dams, rivers, ponds) and surrounding areas.
Did you know?
One of the diseases that can spread due to waterlogging is leptospirosis. Here are the 3 most common diseases that occur during the rainy season and ways by which you can safeguard yourself.
Click Here 
Specialist To Visit

The specialists that can help diagnose and curate a treatment plan for leptospirosis include:
General physician
Internal medicine specialist
Infectious disease specialist

A general practitioner can evaluate the symptoms, start the treatment and if need be, refer to a specialist. 
An internal medicine specialist provides comprehensive medical care, manages symptoms, and monitors organ function.
An infectious disease specialist specializes in the diagnosis, control, and treatment of infectious diseases.

If you are facing any health issues, talk to our healthcare experts to get the right diagnosis and treatment.
Consult Now

Treatment Of Leptospirosis 

The following points help in the management of mild cases of leptospirosis:
Ensuring that you get plenty of rest to aid in recovery and conserve energy.
Having adequate fluid intake, such as water and electrolyte-rich beverages like coconut water to maintain hydration and support overall health.
Taking pain relievers like paracetamol, ibuprofen, or naproxen as advised by the physician.

Medical treatment depends on the severity of the symptoms and includes:
1. Medications 
In outpatient cases, antibiotics that may be used include doxycycline, amoxicillin, azithromycin or ampicillin can be used to destroy harmful bacteria. 
If the infection is severe, one may use intravenous penicillin G, ceftriaxone, or erythromycin. 
Patients with severe leptospirosis usually need intensive care unit admission as multiple organs can be involved. In the case of kidney failure, corticosteroids can be administered. 

Order medications from India’s largest online pharmacy for guaranteed delivery.
Upload your prescription now
2. Medical therapies
At the hospital, depending on your clinical condition and the severity, you may require additional medical interventions, such as:
Mechanical ventilation: Respiratory distress due to lung involvement may require mechanical ventilation.
Dialysis: In advanced cases, dialysis helps in filtering toxins out of the blood and allows the kidneys to recover from the effects of the disease.
 Additional therapies: These include the use of ophthalmic drops, diuretics, and inotropic agents (a group of medicines that affect the contraction of the heart muscle), renal-dose dopamine (renal dose dopamine is prescribed worldwide for the prevention and treatment of acute renal failure). 
  Did you know?
Monsoons can pose a big threat to health. Here are a few tips to protect oneself from the ill effects of the monsoon while enjoying the beautiful weather with your family.

Read more
Treatment in Pets
Leptospirosis can be effectively managed using antibiotics. Administering early treatment to an animal can lead to a faster recovery and potentially reduce the severity of organ damage. In some cases, additional treatment approaches like dialysis and hydration therapy may be necessary.

Have pets at home?
Try our range of pet care supplies to give your pets all the love and pampering they deserve.
Explore now

Home Care For Leptospirosis

Some home remedies can augment conventional medical treatment. These include:
Turmeric (Haldi): Studies suggest that turmeric is a potent antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic, and antimicrobial agent that can help combat infections.

You can consume it by adding a pinch of turmeric powder to a glass of milk and drink twice a day.
Buy turmeric products online

Ginger (Adrak): According to various studies conducted, it has been found that ginger extracts decrease anti-inflammatory components which can cause organ damage due to leptospirosis.
You can add freshly grated ginger to your meals, such as soups, stir-fries, etc, or brew a cup of ginger tea by steeping freshly sliced ginger in hot water for 5-10 minutes. 

Want to know more about the health benefits of ginger?
Read this now
Milk thistle: It is a powerful antioxidant and research suggests that milk thistle extract not only prevents damage to the liver caused by leptospirosis but also helps repair it.

Note: This is a herbal supplement, so talk to your doctor regarding the dosage and frequency of consuming it.

Complications Of Leptospirosis

If untreated for a prolonged period leptospirosis may lead to:
Damage to the kidney
Severe lesions of the kidneys and heart 
Inflammatory disease-causing swelling and damage to the eye tissue
Pulmonary or lung complications
Heart failure
Liver damage
Death of a fetus or abortion in pregnant women
Hemodynamic collapse (shock).

Did you know?
COVID-19 infections can mimic leptospirosis symptoms. Studies suggest that COVID-19 can show the signs and symptoms of other infectious diseases and confuse doctors in their search for a confirmatory diagnosis.
Learn everything about COVID-19.
Click here

Alternate Treatment For Leptospirosis 

Alternative treatments alongside conventional medical treatment for leptospirosis have proven to be beneficial in some cases. It includes:
Ayurveda
According to Ayurveda, leptospirosis is Krumi Roga (worm infestation). Common ayurvedic herbs used are:
Ashwagandha: It is a potent herb that helps with pain and muscle aches associated with leptospirosis.

Shop for ashwagandha products.
Click here

Mahashankh vati: It helps with re-establishing the digestive fire, enhances the appetite, and removes digestive endotoxins produced in leptospirosis.
Shop for mahashankh vati products.
Buy here
Frequently Asked Questions
Is leptospirosis a serious illness?
Is leptospirosis a common tropical disease?
Is there a vaccine for leptospirosis in humans?
Is there a cure for leptospirosis?
Can leptospirosis be transmitted from person to person?
References
Goarant C. Leptospirosis: risk factors and management challenges in developing countries. Res Rep Trop Med. 2016 Sep 28.
Budihal SV, Perwez K. Leptospirosis diagnosis: competency of the various laboratory tests. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014 Jan;8(1):199-202.
John TJ. The prevention and control of human leptospirosis. J Postgrad Med. 2005 Jul-Sep.
Budihal SV, Perwez K. Leptospirosis diagnosis: competency of various laboratory tests. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014 Jan;8(1):199-202.
Treatment. Leptospirosis. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. June 2015.
Introduction. Leptospirosis.National Health Portal, India. Jan 2016.
Nick Day. Leptospirosis: Epidemiology, microbiology, clinical manifestations, and Diagnosis. Oct 2022.
Prasad S, Aggarwal BB. Turmeric, the Golden Spice: From Traditional Medicine to Modern Medicine. In: Benzie IFF, Wachtel-Galor S, editors. Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects. 2nd edition. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2011. Chapter 13.
Rahmani AH, Shabrmi FM, Aly SM. Active ingredients of ginger as potential candidates in the prevention and treatment of diseases via modulation of biological activities. Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 12;6(2):125-36. PMID: 25057339; PMCID: PMC4106649.
Achufusi TGO, Patel RK. Milk Thistle. [Updated 2022 Sep 12]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.
Wang S, Stobart Gallagher MA, Dunn N. Leptospirosis. [Updated 2022 May 2].
Rajapakse S. Leptospirosis: clinical aspects. Clin Med (Lond). 2022 Jan;22.
Ahmed S, et al. Laboratory diagnosis of leptospirosis. Journal of Postgraduate Medicine. Volume : 51 Issue : 3 . 2005.
R. W. ROSS RUSSELL. NEUROLOGICAL ASPECTS OF LEPTOSPIROSIS. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat., 1959, 22, 143.
De Silva NL, Sivayoganathan S, Sivashangar A, Wickramasinghe W, Gooneratne L, Rajapakse S. Can findings on peripheral blood smear differentiate leptospirosis from other infections? A preliminary comparative study. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2018;112(2):94-96.
Shakshi et al. LEPTOSPIROSIS: AN AYURVEDIC APPROACH. World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences. Nov 2017.
National Guidelines Diagnosis, Case Management Prevention and Control of Leptospirosis. National Centre For Disease Control. 2015.
Khattak et al. Leptospirosis: A disease with global prevalence. J Microbiol Exp. @018;6(5):219‒221.
Shivakumar, Singh. (2008). Leptospirosis - Current Scenario in India. 10.13140/2.1.4905.6968.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.