Inflammation within blood vessels (Vasculitis)
Also known as Angiitis, Arteritis, Inflammation within blood vessels, and inflammation in arteries
Overview
Vasculitis is a group of conditions where the body's immune system causes inflammation and narrowing of blood vessels, including arteries, veins, and capillaries. This can lead to damage to the vessels and interfere with the flow of blood throughout the body.
  Vasculitis can cause mild to life-threatening symptoms. The exact cause for vasculitis is unclear; however, smoking, substance abuse, unhealthy habits, chronic infections, and genetics can increase the likelihood of developing it. Based on the size of the affected blood vessels, vasculitis can result in diverse symptoms and is classified into 20 disorders. It is vital to determine the type and position of the affected blood vessels and organs before treating it. 
  Maintaining a healthy lifestyle with exercise, a balanced diet, and symptom management can help minimize complications and enhance the quality of life. Treatment usually involves medication to control inflammation and prevent future episodes. Surgery may be required in severe cases.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Blood vessels of the entire body
Mimicking Conditions
Endocarditis
Histoplasmosis (fungal infection)
Gonococcal arthritis 
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Atrial myxoma
Lymphoma
Necessary health tests/imaging
Blood tests: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), Complement levels, and IgE levels.
Urine dipstick
Imaging tests: X-ray, Angiography, Ultrasound scan, EKG, EMG, CT scan, and MRI.
Molecular imaging: Positron emission tomography: and PET scan.
Biopsy
Treatment
1. Medications
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): Aspirin
Immunomodulators: Azathioprine and Cyclosporine
Corticosteroids: Prednisolone, & Methylprednisolone 
Antimalarial drugs: Hydroxychloroquine
Neutrophil-chemotaxis inhibitors: Dapsone and colchicine
Antiviral drugs: Interferon α, Ribavirin, Vidarabine, and/or lamivudine 
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: Rituximab, Cyclophosphamide, Azathioprine, & Methotrexate.
Intravenous immunoglobulin G
2. Surgery
Plasmapheresis and Bypass surgery.
Specialists to consult
General Physician
Rheumatologists
Neurologists
Ophthalmologists
Cardiologists
Nephrologists
Pulmonologists
Dermatologists
Symptoms Of Vasculitis
  Vasculitis can affect blood vessels in different ways. Palpable purpura, which appears as small raised bruises, is a critical sign of small-vessel vasculitis, but other skin lesions may also occur. Vasculitis can cause a range of symptoms in various parts of the body that include:
Red or purple spots, on the skin
Itching, lumps, or sores
Headaches
Fatigue
Fever
Loss of weight
Abdominal pain
Pain and numbness in hands and feet 
Diarrhea
Ulcers in the stomach
Bleeding in stools
Muscle weakness
Confusion, and difficulty focusing
Dizziness
Ringing in the ears or hearing loss
Chronic sinus congestion
Bleeding from nose
Eyes may be red, and itchy
Vision problems
Difficulty breathing
Coughing up blood
High blood pressure
Arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat)
Angina (chest pain)
Fluid retention or failure of kidneys
  Note: In serious cases, vasculitis can block blood vessels, so blood can’t flow through them, or they can bulge (aneurysm) and possibly burst .
These symptoms not only take a toll on the body, but can affect the mind as well. Make your mental health a priority with our widest range of mental wellness products to meet your needs.
Check them out
Types Of Vasculitis

Vasculitis can be differentiated based on the size of the blood vessels affected, falling into one of three general categories. They include:
Large vessel vasculitis
It affects the body’s large arteries, including the aorta (which transports oxygen-rich blood from your heart to the rest of your body). Following are the types of large vessel vasculitis:
1. Giant cell arteries (temporal arteries): It is generally found in adults older than age 50. It affects upper body parts including the head, temples, and neck.
2. Takayasu arteritis: This type of vasculitis affects the large artery and may cause inflammation, narrowing, or blockage of the arteries or weaken the lining of artery walls that may rupture or burst.
Medium vessel vasculitis
This category belongs to medium blood vessels. The following are the types of medium vessel vasculitis:
1. Kawasaki disease (KD): It is common in young children (under the age of 5). Inflammation in multiple arteries and veins of the body is seen. It affects lymph nodes, mucous membranes, and skin. It can lead to severe health problems such as heart damage, if not diagnosed and treated properly. 
2. Polyarteritis nodosa: It affects multiple blood vessels in different parts of the body, including the skin, heart, kidneys, muscles, and intestines. 
Small vessel vasculitis
As the name suggests, this type is characterized by inflammation and blockage of small arteries. Different types of small vessel vasculitis include:
1. Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA): It causes inflammation of small blood vessels along with inflammation in the kidneys, lungs, and nerves, but also involves the skin and joints. 
2. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA): It is a rare condition that causes inflammation in small blood vessels, and it's more common in older individuals. 
3. Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA): It is an extremely rare form of vasculitis that causes inflammation in small blood vessels, leading to restricted blood flow and potential organ damage if not treated. It primarily affects the respiratory system and is linked with asthma.
4. Immunoglobulin A (IgA): It is a type of vasculitis that can occur in people of all ages, but is more common in young children. It is caused by the accumulation of immunoglobulin A (an antibody) in small blood vessels. This leads to inflammation and bleeding and can affect various parts of the body such as the skin, joints, kidneys, or intestines.
5. Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis (HUV): It is an uncommon type of vasculitis that causes inflammation of small blood vessels that are linked to antibodies. It can lead to kidney damage and other health issues such as arthritis, lung problems, and eye inflammation.
Others
1. Behcet’s disease: This condition affects blood vessels of all sizes and including skin, kidney, heart, brain, and spinal cord. More common during the second and third decades of life.
2. Buerger disease: This is inflammation of small and medium-sized blood vessels. It causes a tightening, or a blockage, of the blood vessels in your feet and hands.
Causes Of Vasculitis
  The exact cause of vasculitis is not yet known. However, it is believed that vasculitis happens when the immune system mistakenly attacks blood vessel cells as if they were foreign objects. This makes it an autoimmune disease. Certain types of vasculitis may be linked to a person's genetics as well. 
Risk Factors For Vasculitis

Vasculitis is a rare autoimmune disease that can affect anyone. Some of the risk factors associated with vasculitis are:
1. Family history
Vasculitis runs in families, and the most common types include:
Behçet’s disease
IgA vasculitis
Kawasaki disease
2. Lifestyle choices
Smoking can increase your risk of Buerger's disease, especially if you're a man younger than 45. Using drugs such as cocaine also raises your risk of developing vasculitis.
  It’s never too late to quit smoking.
Try our widest range of smoking cessation products available to help you get rid of this deadly habit successfully.
Explore here
3. Medications
The risk of vasculitis increases if you take certain medicines like hydralazine, levamisole, propylthiouracil, and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors (used to treat some immune diseases).
4. Medical conditions
Disorders that can increase your chances of getting vasculitis include:
Autoimmune disorders: People with disorders in which their immune systems start attacking their body parts by mistake may be at higher risk of vasculitis. These disorders include lupus, Sjogren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and scleroderma.
Cancer: Such as lymphomas can increase the risk of vasculitis. Studies suggest that cutaneous vasculitis is a manifestation of cancer. 
Infections: Having hepatitis B or C infections can increase your risk of vasculitis. Also, bacterial infections like gonorrhea may be associated with small-vessel vasculitis. 
5. Sex
Depending on the type, the prevalence among men and women can change. For example:
Buerger’s disease: It is most common in men
Giant cell arteritis: It affects women 4 times more often than men
Microscopic polyangiitis: It affects men slightly more often than women.
6. Race
Ethnicity can also increase your risk of vasculitis like:
Behçet’s disease: Common in the Mediterranean, the Middle East, Central Asia, China, and Japan.
Giant cell arteritis: Common in Scandinavia and Minnesota.
Kawasaki disease: Common among Japanese children.

Did you know?
Systemic vasculitis can increase your complications if you are infected with the COVID-19 virus. Keep your guard up with our coronavirus prevention range here.
Stock up


Diagnosis Of Vasculitis

Diagnosing vasculitis can be tricky as there are several types and the symptoms can overlap with those of other conditions. Your doctor will ask questions regarding your health and recent medication. They will also do a physical exam and various tests to determine the type of vasculitis or rule out other conditions that look like it. Diagnostic approaches includes:
Blood tests
Antibodies and certain types of blood cells can be signs of vasculitis. These blood tests include:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) test: These tests can help determine whether inflammation is present or not. 
C-reactive protein (CRP) test: It is done to check chronic disease or severe infection. A higher CRP value can indicate a sign of acute inflammation in the body.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA): This blood test helps to determine whether ANCA is present in your bloodstream to check for any autoimmune activity.
Complement levels: This test is done to determine bacterial or viral infection as the cause of vasculitis. 
IgE levels: The IgE is an antibody, that the immune system produces to identify and eliminate harmful microorganisms.
Hepatitis panel: It is a blood test used to determine if a person has been infected with hepatitis A, B, or C viruses.
Antiglomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies: This test is done to check for any kidney damage as a result of viral infection.
Antinuclear antibody (ANA): This helps to detect if there are autoimmune diseases.
Antiphospholipid antibodies (APL): This blood test indicates the occurrence of Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), which is an autoimmune disorder that causes abnormal blood clotting due to antibodies.
HIV test: To rule out HIV infections in individuals presenting with symptoms of vasculitis.
Urine dipstick and microscopic tests
A urine dipstick involves dipping a specially treated paper strip into a sample of your urine. These will help to detect the presence of blood and protein in the urine, which are the first signs of small vessel vasculitis in the kidneys (inflamed kidney).
Imaging tests 
These tests can help evaluate and confirm which blood vessels and organs are affected. They include:
X-ray
Angiography
Ultrasound scan
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Electromyography (EMG)
Computed tomography (CT) scan
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Biopsy
It is a minor surgical procedure in which a small piece of tissue is removed from the affected area of your body. Your doctor then examines this sample of tissue under a microscope for certain signs of vasculitis. This procedure is helpful in evaluating the types of small vessel vasculitis and medium vessel vasculitis.
Molecular imaging
This is a growing area of research that visualizes, characterizes, and quantifies the processes taken in the body. This is a newer advancement in the imaging of vasculitis that includes:

Positron emission tomography: This test measures the function by looking at blood flow, metabolism, neurotransmitters, and drugs.
PET scan: This test is used in the diagnosis of large vessel vasculitis.

Not sure where to get all the lab tests done?
Well, look no further. Book your lab tests from the comfort of your home.
Get tests here

Celebs affected
Ashton Kutcher
The renowned Hollywood actor was diagnosed with vasculitis. Recently, he tweeted about the condition and his recovery.
Specialist To Visit

Detecting vasculitis early is crucial for receiving effective treatment and avoiding further complications. A general physician may identify symptoms and conduct a physical exam, but specialists are needed to diagnose and treat specific organ involvement that includes:

Rheumatologists
Neurologists
Ophthalmologists
Cardiologists
Nephrologists
Pulmonologists
Dermatologists
  A rheumatologist is a doctor who specializes in treating inflammatory diseases such as arthritis as well as other issues like tendon and muscle injuries. Doctors who specialize in specific areas include neurologists for brain and nerve disorders, ophthalmologists for eye problems; nephrologists for kidney conditions; pulmonologists for respiratory illnesses; and dermatologists for skin, hair, and nail problems.

Consult our professional doctors to get the right diagnosis and treatment.
Talk to an expert
Prevention Of Vasculitis

Vasculitis is an autoimmune disorder that cannot be prevented, but lifestyle changes and identifying the cause can reduce the risk and prevent flare-ups. They include:
1. Quit smoking and tobacco
Tobacco use increases the likelihood of developing vasculitis by disrupting the immune system but quitting smoking can be a highly effective way to protect yourself from this condition. 

Want motivation to quit smoking? Learn how your body reacts when you stop smoking.
Read this
2. Stay clear of drugs
Vasculitis is one of the common side effects of using illegal drugs. Refraining from such activities can lessen your chances to some extent.
3. Lose some weight
Obesity can worsen the disease's progression. Engaging in low-intensity exercises for 20-30 minutes, such as walking, swimming, and yoga, can help with weight management and improve blood flow.

A variety of factors can cause obesity. Learn more about the root causes of obesity and ways to combat them.
Read this
4. Take vitamins and supplements
Supplements containing Vitamin D, Vitamin C, and antioxidants can reduce the risk of vasculitis.

Explore our widest range of vitamin and mineral supplements to take care of all your requirements.
Browse here
5. Choose a healthy diet
Eating foods with antioxidants can help fight infections. Increase your intake of foods high in vitamins and fiber, such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, whole grains, lean proteins, low-fat dairy products, and limited amounts of saturated fat. Switching to a healthy diet can prevent illnesses and minimize damage to the body. 
  Want to know how to get maximum nutrition from your diet?
Watch this video to learn
Treatment Of Vasculitis

The treatment of vasculitis depends on the type, location, and severity of the condition. The main objective is to decrease inflammation in the affected area and control any underlying factors that may be causing it. It includes:
Medicines
Medications are prescribed depending on the intensity of the symptoms and the progression of
the disease. They include
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): IgA vasculitis is typically treated
conservatively with NSAIDs like aspirin.
Immunomodulators: These are commonly used to sustain disease remission in the
treatment of ANCA-associated vasculitis. The drugs used are:
Azathioprine 
Cyclosporine 
Corticosteroids: Corticosteroids are used as first-line treatment, and they have
anti-inflammatory properties. The drugs used are:
Prednisolone
Methylprednisolone
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs): These are recommended only if
corticosteroids don't work well or show major side effects. They include:
Rituximab
Cyclophosphamide
Azathioprine
Methotrexate 
Antimalarial drugs: Hydroxychloroquine, has been successful in treating
hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis (huv) but not other types of small vessel
vasculitis.
Neutrophil-chemotaxis inhibitors: These are used in the initial treatments for Behçet's
disease and similar disorders without systemic involvement. They include: 
Dapsone
Colchicine
Antiviral drugs: These are important in treating virus-associated cases of vasculitis. Most commonly used ones are:
Interferon α
Ribavirin
Vidarabine
Lamivudine
Dual endothelin receptor antagonists: These block the action of a chemical called endothelin that can reduce blood flow.
Interleukin antagonists: These reduce swelling by blocking a protein in the body that causes the swelling.
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors: These drugs increase blood flow by blocking the action of a particular enzyme in the body. 

Ordering medicines has never been easier! Get guaranteed delivery from India’s largest online pharmacy.
Add your prescription now

Intravenous immunoglobulin G (IVIgG)
IVIgG is the preferred treatment for Kawasaki disease, as it helps prevent the development of aneurysms and improves various symptoms.
Note: The medicines used in the treatment of vasculitis often have to be taken for a long time and can have side effects. It is important to talk to your doctor about your medicines and their side effects.
Surgery
Vasculitis can sometimes cause an abnormal bulging of blood vessels called an aneurysm, which can be treated with surgery to prevent bursting. In more severe cases, surgery may be needed to repair damaged blood vessels and organs or even transplant organs. Surgical procedures include:

Plasmapheresis: It is done to reduce plasma antibody levels by removing and replacing blood plasma (liquid portion of blood). 
Bypass surgery: This may be helpful in restoring blood flow in certain areas affected by Buerger's disease.
Maintenance of remission
Corticosteroids are tapered to zero or to the lowest dose that can maintain remission. IV rituximab may also be used to maintain remission, but the optimal dosage and infusion interval have not been clearly established. Individuals with frequent relapses may need to take immunosuppressants indefinitely.
Home-care Of Vasculitis

Home remedies that can help alleviate the symptoms of vasculitis and its types include:
Turmeric (Haldi): Studies suggest that turmeric, also known as curcumin, is helpful in managing autoimmune conditions due to its anti-inflammatory properties.
Buy turmeric products online
Buy turmeric products online
Akarkara: Akarkara root or extract is generally used to manage pain and inflammation due to its antioxidant property.
Garlic (Lahsun): It can be beneficial in the management of urticarial vasculitis due to its anti-inflammatory effect.
Ashwagandha: It has antibacterial properties, which help fight and prevent infections. 
Holy basil (Tulsi): It has anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial properties which can be beneficial for individuals with vasculitis.
Explore tulsi products here
Apple cider vinegar: It can decrease digestive symptoms associated with vasculitis.
Check out our exclusive range of apple cider vinegar products.
Click here


Complications Of Vasculitis

If vasculitis goes undiagnosed for a long time, it can lead to serious complications. They include:
Infections: Some of the prescribed medicines which are used to treat vasculitis may weaken your immune system. This can make you more prone to infections.
Blood clots and aneurysms: Vasculitis can lead to blood clots usually obstructing the blood flow. It can also cause a blood vessel to weaken and can develop an aneurysm.
Vision loss or blindness: This is a complication of untreated giant cell arteritis.
Stroke: The inflamed vessel wall can block oxygen flow to the brain. It can lead to loss of brain function and ultimately strokes.
Organ damage: Some types of vasculitis can be severe, causing damage to major organs such as inflammation of the kidneys, heart, lungs, and other organs.

Did you know that?
Vasculitis is a potential complication of COVID-19, with certain types such as leukocytoclastic (LCV), IgA, and Kawasaki disease.
Learn more about COVID-19

Alternative Therapies For Vasculitis

Complementary therapies along with comprehensive treatment can benefit individuals with vasculitis to manage their symptoms. These therapies include:
1. Compression therapy 
Studies suggest compression therapy by short stretch bandages in vasculitic ulcers can be quite useful to improve the healing time, relieve the burning sensation and pain, due to the reduction of inflammation of blood vessels.

Check out our extensive range of healthcare devices to get your compression support.
Buy them here
2. Chinese herbal medicine
Studies have analyzed Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) for the treatment of vasculitis. These studies suggest that CHM can be given to ease and reduce inflammation of the blood vessels. It shows excellent results in the treatment of children with Kawasaki disease.
3. Acupuncture
It uses needles to lower the levels of chemicals that cause inflammation in the body. It can help reduce pain and is beneficial for individuals with giant cell vasculitis.
4. Homeopathy
This therapy can be effective in treating vasculitis as it targets the root cause of the disease, which is an abnormal immune system. Selecting the appropriate constitutional homeopathic remedy, can boost the immune system and alleviate vasculitis symptoms without any adverse effects. However, it is crucial to seek medical advice before considering any alternative treatment.
5. Yoga and meditation
Practicing yoga and meditation can increase energy and reduce chronic fatigue. These techniques involve deep breathing and positive visualization, which can reduce stress and anxiety and improve immune function by relaxing the body and mind. They also promote positive thinking and mental strength, which are important for fighting serious illnesses.
  Want to understand more benefits of yoga?
Read this

Living With Vasculitis

Vasculitis can greatly affect a person's life and relationships, and can also impact their ability to work. Doctors focus on preventing organ damage and side effects but it's important to remember that it's still possible to have a happy life with vasculitis. A few points that can help include:
1. Give importance to follow-up care
If you experience any new symptoms or other changes in your health, report to your doctor immediately. Regular health checkups and visits can help to monitor any side effects from the given medicine to treat vasculitis.
2. Get your vaccinations 
Routine vaccinations protect you from infectious diseases such as pneumonia, flu, etc. It can help prevent problems and complications that can result from vasculitis treatment.
3. Plan a safe pregnancy
If you had vasculitis as a child and plan to become pregnant, inform your healthcare provider. Also, vasculitis increases the risk of high blood pressure during pregnancy, so blood pressure should be closely monitored. Do not stop taking medication without consulting your doctor.
4. Exercise regularly
Try to exercise more often as it will help you to prevent fatigue and tiredness. It even helps to reduce high blood pressure, regulates blood flow, and prevents other health complications which can be associated with vasculitis. 
5. Maintaining a strong support system
Living with vasculitis can get tiring and difficult and it is vital to seek support from loved ones and connect with support groups for those with vasculitis, which can be recommended by a doctor.
6. Try to avoid flares-ups
Following the advice of your doctor and adopting a healthy lifestyle can help you with flare-ups and prevent relapse.
Frequently Asked Questions
Is vasculitis curable?
Will my children or other family members get vasculitis?
Is vasculitis serious?
Is chemotherapy used to treat vasculitis?
Can long-term use of steroids to treat vasculitis cause health issues?
References
Jatwani S; Goyal A. Vasculitis.[Updated 2022 May 01]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Erkan Alpsoy. Cutaneous vasculitis; An algorithmic approach to diagnosis. Volume-9. Published online 21 September 2022.
Stanley J Naides. Known causes of vasculitis in man. Published online February 2002.
Richard A. Watts, Gulen Hatemi, Jane C. Burns & Aladdin J. Mohammad. Global epidemiology of vasculitis. Published online 1st December 2021.
Matthew A. Rutherford, Jennifer Scott,Maira Karabayas, et al. Risk Factors for Severe Outcomes in Patients With Systemic Vasculitis and COVID-19: A Binational, Registry-Based Cohort Study.American College of Rheumatology. Published online 22nd March 2021.
E Suresh. Diagnostic approach to patients with suspected vasculitis. NLM. Published online 2006 Aug.
Tariq E. Farrah, Neil Basu, Marc Dweck. Advances in Therapies and Imaging for Systemic Vasculitis. Published online 13 Jun 2019.
Symptoms, causes, and diagnosis. Vasculitis. University Of Michigan Health.
Types of vasculitis. Vasculitis. NHS UK. Published online June 2019.
Vasculitis. Causes and risk factors. National Heart, Lung, and Blood.
Kermani TA, Warrington KJ, Amin S. Malignancy risk in vasculitis. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2011 Feb;3(1):55-63.
Diagnosis and living with vasculitis. Vasculitis. American College of Rheumatology. Published online December 2021.
Causes and treatment. Vasculitis. Vasculitis Foundation.
Types of vasculitis, Vasculitis. Johns Hopkins Vasculitis Center.
Barnadas M, Encarnacion M. Refractory Cutaneous IgA Vasculitis Treated with Omega-3 Fatty Acids. Published online 2016 Nov 29.
Hijikata Y, Ikemoto Y, Kohdera U. Kampo medicines improved blood test and QOL in two vasculitis cases of Churg–Strauss syndrome and Henoch–Shönlein purpura after inadequate treatment with conventional therapies. Published online 2010 Apr 8.
Wardle E. Alternative Therapies for Vasculitis and Proliferative Nephritides: The Role of Cyclic AMP Elevating Agents.Published online 2009 July 07.
Smits D, Wilde B, Adegani M, Jongh H, Paassen P, Tervaert J. Metabolic syndrome in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Published online 2012 November 27.
Kutcher A. Tweet. Available online
Daniela R. Petermann Smits, Benjamin Wilde, Makan Kianersi Adegani. Metabolic syndrome in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Published online 27 November 2012.
Yang M, Akbar U, Mohan C. Curcumin in Autoimmune and Rheumatic Diseases. Nutrients. 2019 May 2;11(5):1004.
Despina Eleftheriou & Paul A. Brogan. Therapeutic advances in the treatment of vasculitis. Pediatric Rheumatology. Published online 2016.
Alexandra V. Overview of Vasculitis. MSD Manual. Jun 2022.
Aparna Palit, Arun C. Inamadar Aparna Palit, Arun C. Inamadar. Vasculitis: Approach to diagnosis and therapy. Published online 2006.
Treatment of Vasculitis.National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Updated online 24 March 2022.
Sezgin Y. The Acupuncture Therapeutic Approach in Temporal Arteritis Vasculitis: A Case Report. J Acupunct Meridian Stud. 2018;11(3):116-118.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.