Corns
Also known as Calvus, Heloma and Focal intractable plantar hyperkeratosis
Overview
Corns are calloused areas of skin that develop to protect skin from damage against prolonged rubbing, pressure, and other forms of irritation. Calluses and corns typically form on the hands or feet. 
  Corns and calluses can be caused by many factors, such as wearing too fitted or too loose shoes, not wearing socks, walking barefoot regularly, etc. Other risk factors may include joint problems or other foot-related problems like bunions or hammer toe. These conditions can be prevented by reducing or removing the causes which lead to increased pressure at specific points on the hands or feet.

Corns and calluses can be treated with medicated products which chemically break down the thickened, dead skin. Salicylic acid is usually the main ingredient used in most corn and callus removal products.

People with fragile skin, poor circulation in the feet (due to conditions such as diabetes or peripheral arterial disease), and repeated formation of corns should consult a podiatrist or a healthcare professional for the appropriate management of this condition.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Feet and hands
Mimicking Conditions
Plantar wart
Poroma
Warty dyskeratoma
Calcinosis cutis
Gout and pseudogout
Hypertrophic lichen planus
Interdigital neuroma
Lichen simplex chronicus
Palmoplantar keratoderma
Keratosis punctata of palmar creases
Porokeratosis plantaris discreta
Porokeratosis palmoplantar et disseminata
Necessary health tests/imaging
Dermoscopy 
Radiographs
Pressure studies
Treatment
Topical keratolytic agents
Laser therapy
Surgery
Specialists to consult
Podiatrist
Dermatologist
General physician
General surgeon
Orthopedic
Symptoms Of Corns 
  The following signs and symptoms may indicate corns:
  Flesh-colored dry, hard, rough papules with a whitish center (called the core), usually located over a bony prominence
A raised hardened bump in which the center may be a dense knot of skin
Can cause pain when walking
A thick, rough area of skin
Tenderness or pain under the skin
Flaky, dry, or waxy skin
  Corns can be of the following types:
  Hard corns: They are usually small and occur on the bony areas of feet and hands.
Soft corns: They are whitish in color, have a rubbery texture, and may look like an open sore which might be painful. They usually occur between the toes and in moist and sweaty skin areas.
  A callus is a section of skin that thickens because of friction, pressure, or irritation. It often happens on the feet but can also occur on the hands, elbows, or knees. However, corns and calluses are not the same things. 
  Calluses are usually asymptomatic, but if friction is extreme, they may thicken and cause irritation and mild burning discomfort. 
Callus is less circumscribed than corn, is usually larger, does not have a central core, and may or may not be painful. 
Causes Of Corns
  The bones of the feet have many projections. Excessive pressure is applied to the skin overlying these bony projections either by poorly fitted shoes or some kind of foot deformity, such as hammer toes.
  The body tries to protect this irritated skin by accumulating the outermost layer of the epidermis. But this accumulation causes a prominence that further increases the pressure on bony projections, leading to a vicious cycle and eventually the formation of corns and calluses.
Risk Factors For Corns

Here are some intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors that can lead to the development of corns and calluses:
Extrinsic (outside) factors
  Poorly fitted or open footwear
Irregularities in the shoes, such as a poorly positioned seam or stitching 
High heels
Wearing shoes without socks
Physical activities that lead to excessive pressure and friction, including running, jogging, climbing, etc.
Professions that cause repeated friction or pressure on skin, e.g., athletes or construction workers


Intrinsic (from within) factors 
  Bony prominences
Malunion fracture
Faulty foot mechanics
Cavovarus foot  (a foot with an arch higher than normal, and that turns in at the heel)
Toe deformity (Claw, hammer, mallet)
Short first metatarsal (the shortest of the metatarsal bones located at the base of the big toe)
Hallux rigidus (stiff big toe)
Transfer lesion from osteotomy or removal of adjacent metatarsal head 
Overweight
Did You Know?
Diabetics are more prone to get corns and calluses? Read more about diabetes.
Click Here!
Diagnosis Of Corns

In most cases, doctors can diagnose corns and calluses by visual examination. However, other diagnostic methods include:
  Medical history and physical examination
The doctor will inspect the feet for certain signs and symptoms of corns along with following at the initial stages:
  Patients footwear and information about any previous treatments like osteotomies, orthoses etc. 
Patient’s gait and alignment of feet for faulty mechanics
Location and characteristic of keratotic lesions
Problems with the structure of foot bones
Bone alignment
  Imaging tests
The doctor may perform the following imaging tests to conclude the reason for corn formation:
  Dermoscopy: It is a noninvasive technique primarily used to examine skin lesions and areas affected by hyperkeratosis.
  Radiographs: X-rays of weight-bearing feet may help show any bony prominences that contribute to corn formation. 


Other tests
Some other tests used by healthcare professionals to investigate the underlying cause of corns and calluses are:

Blood tests: Tests such as fasting glucose level and rheumatoid factors are done to find the etiology of foot deformities in some patients. 
  Pedobarographic studies: Pressure studies (pedobarographs) of the feet can highlight areas of excessive pressure associated with corns.
Celebs affected
Katie Holmes
Katie Holmes is one of hollywood actresses who suffered from corns. A source revealed to Globe Magazine in 2019 “She desperately wants to do something about her crooked toes and unsightly bunions and she’s consulted with her surgeon.”
Jennifer Kate Hudson
Jennifer Kate Hudson is an American singer, actress, and talk show host. The American Idol alumnus showed off her corn-filled toes in silver shoes during the 2019 Oscars.
Prevention Of Corns
  Following are some tips to prevent corns and calluses:
  Wear properly fitted shoes. The shoes should neither be forcibly broken into nor should be too loose. Instead they should be comfortable to wear right out of the box.
Allow a space of 1/2 inch between the end of the shoe and the longest toe. For athletic shoes, allow up to 1 inch.
Check the width of the shoes. Adequate room should be allowed across the ball of the foot. The first metatarsophalangeal joint should be in the widest part of the shoe.
The heel should fit snugly.
Check the fit over the instep. A shoe with laces allows for adjustment of this area.
Avoid activities that apply repeated friction or pressure to the skin.
Wear gloves and properly fitted socks with no irritating stitching.
  Suffering from cracked heels? Read about how to heal cracked heels naturally.
Click Here



Specialist To Visit
  Corns are not life-threatening, but can cause a lot of trouble and irritation if left untreated. Doctors who can help diagnose and treat corns include:
Podiatrist
Dermatologist
General physician
General surgeon
Orthopedic

When to visit a doctor?
If you observe that corns and calluses are causing pain and discomfort or affecting your daily life in any way, you are advised to see a podiatrist, a foot specialist. 
  Remember: People with certain comorbidities, like diabetes, poor circulation, or any other serious illness, should have their feet checked from time to time. 

If you notice any symptoms of corns or calluses, seek medical advice.
  Feel free to consult our stellar professionals from the comfort of your home. 
Book An Appointment

Treatment Of Corns

Corns and calluses can become a hinderance in daily life activities and may require treatment for a better quality of life.


The principles of treatment should be:
To provide symptomatic relief
To determine mechanical etiology
To formulate a conservative plan by advising on footwear and prescribing orthoses
To consider surgery if conservative measures fail.


The following treatment protocols may be considered for the management of corns:
  Manual removal: Use a nail file, emery board, or pumice stone immediately after bathing to manually remove hyperkeratotic tissue.
Topical keratolytic agents: These agents facilitate lesion pairing by softening the corns. They usually contain salicylic acid 12.6-40% as a pad or solution. Urea 20-50%, silver nitrate, and hydrocolloid dressings can also be used for this condition. 
  More recently, hydrocolloid dressings that have a hydrating effect on the skin have been evaluated as the potential treatment of keratotic lesions. However, keratolytic agents must be used with caution, as overapplication can cause chemical burns.
  Remember: Neuropathic and immunocompromised patients should avoid these agents.
  Gentle paring (cutting off), debridement, or enucleation: Pain associated with a callosity can be relieved to a certain extent by sharp debridement to reduce the amount of hyperkeratotic tissue.
  This procedure involves cutting off the lesion with a sharp scalpel blade and removing the central keratin plug (on underlying nerves in the papillary layer), with the use of local anesthetic if necessary.
It reduces the pressure on underlying dermal nerves, thus alleviating the pain. Also, recurrence can be prevented by gently trimming the lesion (after soaking the lesion in warm water for 20 minutes) using a pumice stone.


Laser therapy: The 2,940 nm erbium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser has been used to treat corns with minimal thermal tissue damage. The carbon dioxide laser has also been reported to be efficient. However, if the trigger factors are maintained, it might lead to recurrence of lesions in some patients.
  Cushioning and foot biomechanics/Orthoses: Cushioning and altering foot biomechanics can help prevent corns and treat the existing ones.
  Orthotic devices are often prescribed to redistribute mechanical forces in the foot and allow a lesion to heal. There are various types of orthoses, including doughnut-shaped corn pads, heloma shields, and silicone toe splints, that relieve pressure from the tender central core in corns. 
  In addition, silicone sleeves release mineral oil, thereby softening the lesion. Interdigital wedges made of plastazote (a foam padding) or orthodigital splints made of silicone promote healing of an interdigital soft corn.


Surgery: Various surgical options are available for those patients in whom conservative measures have not worked. In rare cases, surgery to correct an underlying problem of bone structure may be needed to treat a corn or callus that keeps returning and is not relieved by padding, shoe inserts, and periodic shaving.
  Note: Diabetic patients with corns and calluses need to be wory, as attempting any treatment of corns on their own may lead to excessive trimming and ultimately abrasion of the skin. Treatment should strictly be done by a specialist only.

How can Diabetic prevent serious foot complications? 
Click Here To Know More



Home-care For Corns

Before treating corn, first evaluate the cause of friction. In many cases, they’ll go away on their own when the pressure or friction causing them stops. If protecting the corns from further irritation doesn’t solve your problem, podiatrist or GP may recommend the following home-care tips to get rid of them:
  Soak the affected area in warm water
You can soak the corn or callus in warm water for about 15-20 minutes or till the skin gets soft.
  File or pumice the surface
You can file the corn and callus using a pumice stone. First you need to soak the pumice stone in warm water for sometime and then use it in circular or sideways motions gently to file the corn or callus. 
  Do not take off much skin
You should be careful and not file the skin excessively, as it might lead to bleeding and infection also.
  Keep the toenails trimmed
Long toenails can push against your shoe, causing a corn to form over time. Keep your toenails trimmed to remove this pressure.
  Use padding
You can surround the corn with donut-shaped adhesive pads to prevent it from making contact with the shoes. Likewise for calluses, you can cushion the affected area with moleskin to relieve pressure or further irritation.
You can also make a "donut" with moleskin, lamb's wool, felt, or foam. Many pharmacies sell over-the-counter products to cushion corns and calluses.
  Wear properly fitted shoes 
Tight shoes are the main cause of corns and calluses. It is advised to wear low-heeled shoes and choose shoes that aren’t too loose or tight. This reduces the irritation that caused the problem in the first place. 
  Moisturize the skin regularly
Use moisturizing lotion or cream with salicylic acid, ammonium lactate, or urea. These ingredients gradually soften the hard corns and calluses.

If you want to know more about home-care for corns and calluses.
Click Here



Complications Of Corns
  Though corns appear to be a minor health problem, they can take a severe shape if not treated in due time.


Complications might include:
Pain
Tinea pedis (a fungal skin infection that usually begins between the toes) 
Ulceration and infection
Septic arthritis
Osteomyelitis

Post-surgical complications include:
Digital swelling
Numbness
Infection
Floppy or flail toe
Deformity recurrence
Joint and toe stiffness

If you want to know more about joint pains.
Click Here


Alternative Therapies For Corns
  The conventional method of treating corn involves surgery.  But this is not a permanent solution, since corns have a tendency to recur. 


However, alternative treatments like homeopathy might be tried.
To Read More Click Here

Living With Corns

Usually corns and calluses aren’t a serious problem, but these minor nuisances can interfere with everyday work. Therefore, it is important to manage them timely. 
Consider the following general strategies and tips to manage corns and calluses:
  Calluses on hands can usually be prevented by wearing gloves while indulging in certain activities, such as when gardening or lifting weights. 
Calluses on feet can usually be prevented by wearing shoes and socks that fit well.
Corns on feet can be prevented by wearing shoes that have a wider toe box.
Wear gloves while using tools, such as a garden spade or rake.
Wear appropriate padding if you expose other parts of your body to friction. For example, if you are on your knees laying carpet, wear knee pads.

A podiatrist may be able to help you make changes that can manage and prevent their occurrence.
In addition, foot problems are common in people with diabetes. You can prevent diabetes-related foot problems by taking care of your feet every day. Managing your blood glucose levels, also called blood sugar, can also help keep your feet healthy.
  Over time, diabetes may cause nerve damage, also called diabetic neuropathy, that can cause tingling and pain, and can also numb feeling in your feet. When you lose feeling in your feet, you may not feel a pebble inside your sock or a blister on your foot, which can lead to cuts and sores. These cuts and sores can also become infected. Hence, special care is paramount for diabetic patients.

Here are a few things that you can do every day to keep your feet healthy:

Check your feet every day.
Wash your feet every day.
Smooth corns and calluses gently.
Trim your toenails straight across.
Wear shoes and socks at all times.
Protect your feet from hot and cold.
Get a foot check at every health care visit.
Frequently Asked Questions
Can corns and calluses be removed?
What is the difference between corn and calluses?
Where do corns and calluses likely to be located?
Can corn and calluses be painful?
Do corns and calluses itch?
References
How to treat corns and calluses [Internet]. American Academy of Dermatology. [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
How to treat corns and calluses [Internet]. American Academy of Dermatology. [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Calluses and corns [Internet]. Harvard Health. 2015 [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Corn and callus [Internet]. DermNet. [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Hardware M. Dangers of calluses and how to prevent them [Internet]. The Podiatry Center. 2021 [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Corns - StatPearls - NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
StatPearls. Corns [Internet]. StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing; 2022 [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Freeman DB. Corns and calluses resulting from mechanical hyperkeratosis [Internet]. American Family Physician. 2002 [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Search publications | Researchgate [Internet]. [cited 2022Nov4]. Available from:
Diabetes & foot problems [Internet]. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2022Nov11]. Available from:
Kiran Panesar BPS( H). Corns and calluses: Overview of common keratotic lesions [Internet]. U.S. Pharmacist – The Leading Journal in Pharmacy. 2014 [cited 2022Nov11]. Available from:
Maurer DM, Raymond TJ, Davis BN. Depression: Screening and diagnosis [Internet]. American Family Physician. 2018 [cited 2022Nov11]. Available from:
Dinulos JGH. Calluses and corns - dermatologic disorders [Internet]. MSD Manual Professional Edition. MSD Manuals; 2022 [cited 2022Nov14]. Available from:
Home - PMC - NCBI [Internet]. National Center for Biotechnology Information. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2022Nov14]. Available from:
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.