Gastroenteritis
Also known as Stomach flu and Intestinal flu
Overview
Gastroenteritis is inflammation in the digestive system including the stomach, small and large intestines.It can be caused by viruses, bacteria, toxins, parasites, some chemicals and medications, although viruses are the leading cause.It is often called as the ‘stomach or intestinal flu,’ although it is not caused by the influenza viruses.The typical symptoms of gastroenteritis include watery diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps.It is contagious and can easily spread from an infected person to others through close contact or touching contaminated surfaces. Consumption of contaminated food and beverages can also be a source of infection of gastroenteritis.

Most cases of gastroenteritis can be prevented by basic hand hygiene measures, prompt disinfection of contaminated surfaces, and avoiding contaminated food and water.Gastroenteritis caused by rotavirus can be prevented by vaccination of children during their first year of life.
Gastroenteritis can be usually treated at home by maintaining the fluid and electrolyte balance by regular intake of clean boiled water, oral rehydration solution (ORS), coconut water, clear soups and fresh fruit juices.In cases of severe dehydration, hospital admission might be required. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups but more common in children
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Small intestine
Large intestine (colon)
Prevalence
Acute appendicitis
Esophagitis
Diverticulitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Peptic ulcer disease
Bowel obstruction
Cholecystitis
Pseudomembranous colitis
Microscopic colitis
Irritable bowel syndrome
Lactose intolerance
Celiac disease
Acute HIV infection
Colorectal cancer
Necessary health tests/imaging
Stool test
Blood test: Complete blood count (CBC) & Serum electrolytes
Urine test: Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) & Creatinine
Imaging tests: CT scan, Ultrasound & X rays
Treatment
Physical examination & medical history
Fluid therapy: Water, Oral rehydration solution, saline solution & Lactate Ringer’s solution.
Antibiotics: Metronidazole, Ceftriaxone & Azithromycin
Antiemetics: Ondansetron & Metoclopramide 
Anti-diarrheal medications: Diphenoxylate & Atropine
Specialists to consult
General physician
Infectious disease specialist
Gastroenterologist
Pediatrician
Symptoms of Gastroenteritis

Gastroenteritis is an acute illness that usually lasts between 1-2 days. However, symptoms may take 1-3 days to develop depending upon the causative agent and may range from slight discomfort to severe dehydration which can be fatal especially in children. The typical symptoms of the infection, irrespective of the cause include: 
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Nausea
Abdominal cramps
Abdominal pain
Headache
Body ache
Chills
Bloating
Loss of appetite 

Gastroenteritis caused by bacteria also includes bloody diarrhea which is called dysentery. It occurs due to the damage of the intestinal wall by the bacteria.
Signs of dehydration
Decreased urine output
Dark-colored urine
Dry skin
Thirst
Dizziness
  Feeling dehydrated? Read the following tips to treat dehydration. 
Click Here!

Signs of dehydration in infants and toddlers
Vomiting is more commonly seen in young children and infants which can even lead to severe dehydration. It is very important to notice the signs of dehydration which include:
Thirst
Dry diapers
Less urination
Lack of urination 
Dry mouth
Lack of tears
Drowsiness
Lack of energy
Sunken fontanel (the soft spot on the top of an infant’s head)
Sunken eyes and cheeks 
Fever

Read the important things that one should keep in mind if your child has continuous vomiting.
Read Now!


Causes of Gastroenteritis

1. Infectious gastroenteritis
Infections causing gastroenteritis can be viral, bacterial, or parasitic in origin. 

Viruses: The most common viruses responsible for gastroenteritis are: 
Norovirus: It is the most common cause and is responsible for most cases of viral gastroenteritis. The virus is mostly responsible for outbreaks within closed communities such as nursing homes, schools, military populations, athletic teams, and cruise ships.
Rotavirus: The virus is mostly responsible for severe vomiting in young children and infants. The infection of rotavirus in children and infants may require hospitalization. 

Less common viruses that can cause gastroenteritis include astrovirus and adenovirus. 

How does viral gastroenteritis spread? 
Viral gastroenteritis is highly infectious. Viruses are present in the vomit and stool of the infected person and can live outside the human body for a long time. It can spread through: 
Direct contact with vomit or stool of infected person
Shaking hands with infected person
Touching contaminated surfaces and objects such as handrails, elevator buttons, utensils, doors etc. 
Sharing food and beverages with the infected person

Bacteria: Although not common, several species of bacteria can also cause gastroenteritis. They include:
Campylobacter: This bacteria spreads through contaminated milk and poultry products. 
Staphylococcus: It is most commonly found in undercooked meats, eggs, and dairy products. 
E. coli: This bacteria is mostly present in undercooked beef, and unwashed fruits and vegetables. 
Shigella: This bacteria usually grows in raw food and contaminated water such as swimming pools. 

How does bacterial gastroenteritis spread?
Improper storage and unhygienic handling of food can allow the bacteria to grow. Bacterial gastroenteritis spreads very quickly by: 
Eating contaminated food and beverages
Handling stool of infected person

Parasite: Parasites refer to the organism that requires a host to grow and multiply. These organisms usually live in the intestine of the patient. The parasites that can cause gastroenteritis include:  
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium

How does parasitic gastroenteritis spread?
The parasites are usually present in the bowel of infected humans and animals and can spread through: 
Swimming in a contaminated pool and accidentally swallowing water, or through contact with infected animals
Handling infected animals 
Changing the nappy of an infected baby and not washing your hands afterwards
2. Chemicals
Gastroenteritis can also be caused by foods contaminated with chemicals such as lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic or by directly consuming a heavy metal or chemical. 
3. Medications
Gastroenteritis can be a side effect of some medications such as :
Antacids containing magnesium as a major ingredient
Antibiotics
Chemotherapy drugs
Colchicine
Digoxin 
Laxatives

Confirming the drug as a cause of gastroenteritis is difficult. To recognize this, doctors are usually asked to discontinue the therapy and observe the clinical changes.
Did you know?
Rains provide respite from the scorching heat and dripping sweat. However, this season puts you at a risk of various diseases that are spread through contaminated food and water such as gastroenteritis. So in monsoons, keep a tab on what you eat and drink. Here is a quick list of foods to avoid in monsoons.
Read Now!
Types of Gastroenteritis

Depending upon the duration of illness, gastroenteritis can be:
Acute: The disease is considered as acute if the duration is 14 days or less than that.
Persistent: If the symptoms persist for 14-30 days, gastroenteritis is considered as persistent.
Chronic: The duration of more than 30 days makes the disease chronic in nature.
Recurrent:  Gastroenteritis is considered chronic in nature if it recurs after 7 days without diarrhea.
Risk Factors For Gastroenteritis

1. Age
Infants and young children are more prone to gastroenteritis because they have low immunity. 

Episodes of high temperature are common in children during their early years due to their developing immunity. Read what to do if your child gets a fever.
Read Now!

2. Malnutrition
It is also seen that people having certain nutritional deficiencies such as Vitamin A or zinc deficiency are more prone to gastroenteritis. 
3. Poor hygiene
People living in poor hygienic conditions with improper sanitation are also at higher risk of catching bacteria and parasites that are responsible for causing gastroenteritis. 
4. Weak immune system
People with weak immunity are more prone to bacterial, viral infections that can cause gastroenteritis. This includes patients undergoing chemotherapy, infected with HIV infections etc. 

Read about 10 ways to boost the immune system. 
Read Now!

5. Poverty 
Poor people living in crowded areas having less access to a balanced diet are at higher risk of gastroenteritis infection.
6. Season
It is also seen that viral infections such as rotavirus and norovirus are more prevalent in winter. 
7. Traveling
People who frequently travel especially to the gastroenteritis endemic areas are at higher risk of catching the infection.  

Read some important tips to keep in mind while traveling. 
Read To Know!
Diagnosis of Gastroenteritis

Gastroenteritis is diagnosed by observing the symptoms of the patients. Laboratory examination is necessary to determine the cause that helps in initiating the right treatment plan. 

Medical history and physical examination
In most cases, the doctor will ask about your medical history to rule out the possibility of other diseases that may present with the same set of symptoms. However, if the patient has consistent fever, bloody stool, and severe dehydration, tests are required. 
A. Stool tests
The examination of the stool sample is done to diagnose bacteria and parasites in the stool. The test does not diagnose specific viral causes of gastroenteritis. Patients with bloody stool, high fever, severe abdominal pain, and chronic dehydration are usually recommended for stool tests due to their high specificity for bacterial gastroenteritis.

1. Examining the stool for blood
Blood in the stool can be a sign of infectious gastroenteritis. The stool sample is checked for the presence of hidden blood. 

2. Stool culture
The culturing of the stool is done to identify the disease causing bacteria. For a stool culture, loose and fresh stool samples are taken. Sometimes, more than one stool samples are collected for the culture. The identification of the virus through stool culture can also be done, however it takes longer.  

3. Testing the stool for parasites and ova
The presence of parasites and ova (the egg stage of the parasite) can also be detected in a stool sample. The identification is done by examining the stool smear under the microscope. 
B. Blood tests
The complete blood count (CBC) is performed to check the infection. The infection can cause mild leukocytosis (high white blood cell count). In case of severe dehydration, electrolytes levels are also measured by blood tests.

Sometimes, serum inflammatory markers are also examined through blood tests. 
C. Urine test
Dehydration can be due to acute kidney injury. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine tests are also recommended to rule out the possibility of kidney disease. 
D. Imaging tests
The imaging tests are rarely done for gastroenteritis. In some cases, imaging studies such as CT scans, ultrasound, and X-ray are done to diagnose the condition of the intestine. CT scans may show thickened walls of the colon or other inflammatory changes of the bowel. Imaging studies are mostly done to rule out other major causes of the symptoms. 
Specialist To Visit

In most of the cases, gastroenteritis does not lead to severe complications. However, patients with severe dehydration should consult the doctor immediately as it may cause hypoglycemia and electrolyte imbalance. 

Diarrhea should not be ignored in newborns and infants as it can lead to severe dehydration and can prove to be fatal. The immediate medical attention is also advised in case of: 
Old age
Pregnancy
Low immunity

The following doctors can be consulted for diagnosis and treatment:
General physician
Infectious disease specialist
Gastroenterologist
Pediatrician (in case of children)

Consult India’s best doctors here with a single click. 
Consult Now!
Prevention of Gastroenteritis

Vaccination
Immunization for rotavirus is recommended for young children and infants to prevent the risk of gastroenteritis, hospitalization, and death from rotavirus infection. 

There are currently 2 vaccines available that are given two or three doses as per the type of vaccine. The first dose is given before the child is 15 weeks of age. Children should receive all doses of rotavirus vaccine before they turn 8 months of age. 
Hand washing
Most viral gastroenteritis can be prevented by washing of hands with soap and water for at least 10 seconds after going to the toilet, before preparing or handling food, before eating food, after handling vomiting of an infected patient, and after changing diapers of the child. The hand washing facilities should be available for staff, residents, children, and visitors in child care centers and hospitals.

There is also evidence that alcohol-based hand sanitizers in addition to handwashing reduces the chances of gastroenteritis in offices and daycares. Reduction in school absenteeism is also observed.

Learn the right way of washing your hands!
Tap To Know!

Education
People, especially children, should be educated about the importance of hand washing and maintaining good hygiene as the most effective way of preventing gastroenteritis. There should be signs of hand washing in toilets and eating areas to constantly remind the same.
Hygiene measures
Infectious gastroenteritis spreads through contaminated surfaces. Practicing good hygiene is the best way to prevent infection. The following measures can be taken to ensure the cleanliness:
Keep the nails short and avoid wearing false fingernails, nail extenders and nail polish, and jewelry as they restrict adequate cleaning of hands.
Clean the surfaces or objects that have been exposed to vomits or feces.
Wear disposable gloves and masks while handling feces or vomit of infected individuals. 
Use disposable paper towels to dry your hands. Clothes towels should be avoided as bacteria can survive on objects. 
Keep kitchen tops, toys, toilet seats, nappy change tables clean to avoid the growth of bacteria and viruses. 
Isolation
As gastroenteritis is highly contagious, isolation of the patient prevents the spread of the infection.  Children who have experienced diarrhea should not return to childcare until 24 hours after symptoms have resolved. Anyone with diarrhea should not swim for at least 2 weeks after complete recovery.
Dietary modifications
As contaminated food and beverages are the most important source of infection, some dietary modification can help prevent the infection. 
Cook the foods thoroughly
Avoid consuming uncooked and unpasteurized milk
Drink only bottled water while traveling. 
Avoid food buffets, uncooked foods or peeled fruits and vegetables, and ice in drinks.
Studies also suggest that daily administration of probiotics especially in children reduces the occurrence of acute gastroenteritis.  
The intake of zinc supplements also has a preventive effect on diarrhea associated with gastroenteritis. 
Breastfeeding
Antibodies in human milk enhance the infant’s immunity and play a major role in the prevention of certain diseases. The complete breastfeeding for the initial four months of life lowers the risk of acute gastroenteritis and it also decreases the rate of hospitalization due to diarrhea. 
Treatment of Gastroenteritis

The treatment of gastroenteritis is based upon the cause and symptoms. The most important goal of the therapy is to maintain hydration and electrolyte balance that is disturbed due to vomiting and persistent diarrhea.

In some cases such as severe dehydration, uncontrolled vomiting, severe electrolyte disturbances, significant renal failure, continuous abdominal pain, and pregnancy, hospital admission is required. The treatment protocols may include: 
Fluid therapy
Most cases of mild dehydration can easily be managed at home through fluid therapy.
It is advised to drink plenty of fluids to compensate for water loss and prevent dehydration.  
Oral rehydration solutions are preferred over other clear fluids for managing  diarrhea.
Fluids high in sugar (such as cola, apple juice, and sports drink) should be avoided as they may aggravate dehydration and diarrhea.
Patients having severe dehydration and persistent vomiting may require hospital admission for continuous monitoring of electrolyte level. 
Enteral (oral or nasogastric) and intravenous fluids (Saline solution and lactate Ringer’s solutions) are given to patients facing difficulty in taking fluids due to nausea, vomiting, and to correct electrolyte levels. 
Zinc supplementation
Zinc is a metal that is found in a variety of foods such as meat, fish, almonds, and cereals. Diarrhea, the most common symptom of gastroenteritis, is associated with severe zinc deficiency. 

Zinc supplementation is a very safe and effective way for reducing complications due to gastroenteritis in children. WHO recommends the intake of 10 to 20 mg of zinc for 10 to 14 days for the management of diarrhea in children. It is given in the form of zinc sulfate, zinc acetate, or zinc gluconate.
Probiotics
Probiotics are effective in the treatment of diarrhea, especially for diseases with an infectious origin. The use of probiotics is associated with the reduction in the duration of the diarrhea, if started immediately after the onset of symptoms. 
Antibiotics
They are mostly used to treat gastroenteritis caused by bacteria. Some of the commonly used antibiotics in gastroenteritis include metronidazole, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin. 
Antiemetics 
Antiemetic medications are the drugs that are used to control nausea and vomiting. The commonly used antiemetic medications are ondansetron and metoclopramide. 
Antidiarrheal medications
Antidiarrheal medications are used only in those patients who are not able to maintain a well-hydrated status. Medications such as diphenoxylate, atropine are used.
Home-care For Gastroenteritis

Keep a watch on fluid intake
It is advised to have plenty of fluids like fresh fruit juices, coconut water, clear soups etc. In case of severe vomiting, take small sips of fluids at regular intervals. The mothers of the infected infants should make sure that their babies are getting enough breast milk. 
Have ice chips
If you are facing difficulty in digesting fluids, try to suck ice chips. This also helps in rehydration. The ice chips should not be given to small children. 
Add these foods to your diet
B.R.A.T stands for bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. These food items should be included in the diet as it helps in making the stool smooth and helps in compensating the nutrient loss from vomiting and diarrhea.
Foods like chicken or other lean meats, whole grains and potatoes help in reducing the symptoms of gastroenteritis
It is also advised to consume smaller easy to digest meals at regular intervals.
Avoid certain foods
Certain food items should be avoided as they can make the stomach upset and can cause indigestion. The impaired digestion can aggravate diarrhea and vomiting. These include:
Greasy and spicy food containing chilly, black pepper, and garlic 
Drinks with caffeine, such as coffee and tea, and some soft drinks.
Fatty junk foods such as fried foods, pizza, and fast foods.
Foods and drinks containing large amounts of simple sugars, such as sweetened beverages and packaged fruit juices.
Milk and milk products, containing the sugar lactose which can cause some people to develop lactose intolerance 
Take proper rest
People with gastroenteritis should take proper rest even after the completion of therapy. This will lead to complete recovery and healing of the digestive system. 
Try heating pad 
Some patients of gastroenteritis suffer from severe abdominal pain. Such patients can use a heating pad to relieve cramps.  
Say no to alcohol
Alcohol can cause inflammation in the stomach. This can increase the secretion of gastric acid. So, alcohol should be avoided as it can increase the feeling of vomiting (nausea). 
Myths and Facts
A lot of us try to defend our drinking habits by citing imaginary benefits of alcohol. With a lot of research that backs the ill-effects of alcohol, there are some myths about alcohol that are read true by a lot of us. Here are a few common myths about the ‘benefits’ of alcohol which are not true.
Bust Now!
Complications Of Gastroenteritis

In most of the cases, gastroenteritis is resolved through fluid therapy and medications. However, persistent diarrhea and vomiting can lead to: 

1. Dehydration

2. Metabolic acidosis

3. Electrolyte imbalance 
Hypernatraemia (high levels of sodium)
Hyponatraemia (low levels of sodium)
Hypokalaemia (high levels of potassium)

Development of intolerance to food such as lactose, glucose, cow’s milk, and soy protein

4. Increase susceptibility to infection

5. Dehydration can lead to more serious problems, such as:
Heat stroke: Lack of fluids could lead to heatstroke. This is more common in physically active patients. 
Kidney disorders: The long episode of dehydration can develop or trigger kidney stones, urinary tract infections (UTIs), or even kidney failure. 
Seizures: The electrolyte imbalance can also develop seizures in the long run.
Hypovolemic shock: This can develop due to low blood volume and a drop in blood pressure. 
Alternative Therapies For Gastroenteritis

Home remedies

Tea: Caffeine-free teas are proven to be beneficial in nausea and vomiting. Peppermint and lemon can be added to improve the taste.

Ginger (Adrak): It possesses anti-inflammatory, anti-viral, and anti-bacterial properties. It also eases nausea. It can be taken in raw form or can be boiled in water or tea. 

Apple cider vinegar: It can soothe an irritated stomach and thereby reduce nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramps.

Add 1 teaspoon of apple cider vinegar to a glass of warm water and drink 30 minutes before eating a meal. 

Yogurt: It contains a lot of good bacteria that help in maintaining the overall good health of the gut. It also helps in reducing watery diarrhea. It should be added to every meal of the patient suffering from gastroenteritis.

Cinnamon (Dalchini): It has antibacterial and antiviral properties which can be used for combating gastroenteritis. It also helps in reducing stomach pain and bloating. 

Turmeric (Haldi): Curcumin, present in turmeric, possesses anti-inflammatory properties. It can be consumed by adding in a glass of warm water or milk. 

Basil (Tulsi): It possesses antispasmodic properties and helps in reducing spasms in gastroenteritis. It also has gastroprotective properties which aid in relieving symptoms of gastroenteritis. 

Peppermint: It soothes the stomach and helps in treating bloating and gas. The most effective way to use it is to consume it in the form of tea. 

Triphala: It is known to improve digestive health and also helps in the absorption of nutrients. 

Coriander (dhania): It possesses healing properties and it is known to alleviate the symptoms of upset stomach and diarrhea.

Asafoetida (hing): It is known for years to strengthen the digestive system. It possesses antiviral and antibacterial properties. It can be added in meals or can be consumed with lukewarm water. 

Licorice (mulethi): It also promotes the healing of an inflamed stomach and treats indigestion. 

Rice water: It is used especially in infants to reduce diarrhea. 

Chamomile tea: It is used as a digestive relaxant and can help in the treatment of many gastrointestinal disturbances, like diarrhea and vomiting, which is most commonly observed in gastroenteritis. 
Acupressure
Patients suffering from excessive nausea and vomiting can also try acupuncture finger pressure techniques as it is shown to stimulate trigger points that may help in reducing nausea and vomiting.
Frequently Asked Questions
For how long does gastroenteritis is contagious?
How long does gastroenteritis last in a child?
Are gastroenteritis and flu the same illness?
How common is gastroenteritis in children?
References
Viral gastroenteritis factsheet, NSW government, NSW health, Last updated on: 27th July, 2018.
Norovirus, National Foundation For Infectious Diseases.
Norovirus factsheet, NSW government, NSW health, Last updated on: 14th May, 2018.
Illness prevention, Vessel Sanitation Program, Center For Disease Control and Prevention, Last updated on 19th October, 2018.
Rotavirus infection factsheet, NSW government, NSW health, Last updated on: 01st July, 2012.
Stuempfig ND, Seroy J. Viral Gastroenteritis. [Updated 2021 Jun 24]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Gastroenteritis - controlling viral outbreaks in childcare centers and schools, NSW government, NSW health, Last updated on: 06th May, 2019.
Gastroenteritis, Better Health Channel.
Bacterial Gastroenteritis, Health, John Hopkins University.
Understanding Viral Gastroenteritis,John Hopkins University. John Hopkins University.
Norovirus infection, Virginia Department Of Health, Last update on: September 2018.
Symptoms & Causes of Viral Gastroenteritis (“Stomach Flu”), National Institute Of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Disease, Last update on: May 2018.
Rotavirus Vaccination, Center For Disease Control and Prevention, Last updated on 25th March, 2021.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.