Osteomalacia
Also known as Soft bones, Hypovitaminosis D osteopathy and Rickets in children
Overview
The word ‘osteomalacia’ comes from the Greek words ‘osteon’ and ‘malakia’ which mean ‘bone’ and ‘soft’ respectively. It refers to a condition which causes marked softening of the bones due to a decreased ability to harden or mineralize. 

Bones are made up of various minerals, including calcium and phosphorus, that give structure and integrity to the bones. Vitamin D controls levels of calcium and phosphorus in the body. An imbalance of these minerals which usually occurs due to deficiency of Vitamin D can interfere with bone health and can cause an individual to develop osteomalacia. 

Osteomalacia can cause bone pain, muscle weakness, difficulty in walking, and an increased susceptibility to bone fractures. This condition is mostly seen in adults. In children, it is referred to as rickets, which causes impaired mineralization at the bone growth plate. This results in softening and deformation of bones in children and limits their growth. Osteomalacia is different from osteoporosis. Though both can cause bones to fracture, osteomalacia is a problem with bones not hardening, while osteoporosis is the weakening of living bone caused when balance between bone loss and bone formation is disrupted.

Treatment for osteomalacia involves providing adequate Vitamin D and calcium, both of which are required to harden and strengthen bones, and treating the causing disorders.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults above 18 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Long bones
Ribs
Spine
Mimicking Conditions
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Renal osteodystrophy
Osteoblastic bone metastases
Osteoporosis
Necessary health tests/imaging
Blood tests : Serum calcium and phosphorus, Serum alkaline phosphatase, and Serum Vitamin D. 
Bone radiograph
Bone biopsy
Treatment
Maintaining PTH levels: Levels of serum 25OHD at >30 ng/mL and PTH levels in the reference range.
Oral preparations of Vitamin D: 800 to 1200 IU daily oral doses.
Vitamin D with calcium: Higher amounts in the range of 2000 to 3000 mg daily are needed in patients with underlying conditions.
Specialists to consult
General physicians
Orthopedic
Rheumatologist
Endocrinologist
Symptoms Of Osteomalacia

Clinical manifestations of osteomalacia are primarily due to the incomplete mineralization of the bone making it weaker and more flexible, resulting in the bowing of the long bones of the lower extremities. Some of the common symptoms include:
Bone pain 
Tenderness
Muscle weakness (commonly of the thigh and knee joints)
Fragile bones
Fractures
Myopathy (diseases affecting the muscles)
Waddling gait
Increased falls
Hypocalcemic seizures or tetany
Myalgias and arthralgias (pain in the muscles)
Muscle spasms
Spinal, limb, or pelvic deformities
Did you know?
The prevalence of Vitamin D deficiency in India ranges from 40% to 99%, which means almost every Indian lacks sufficient Vitamin D. Learn about signs and symptoms of vitamin D deficiency.
Click Here To Know!
Causes Of Osteomalacia

Osteomalacia is a metabolic bone disease characterized by impaired mineralization of the bone matrix. Bone creation occurs by the deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals on the bone matrix. The causes include:

Decreased production of Vitamin D
Vitamin D plays an extremely important role in bone remodeling and is required for strengthening the bone. Some of the causes of decreased Vitamin D production are:
Reduced sun exposure due to cold weather climates leading to low levels of Vitamin D .
Darker skin and increased melanin hinder Vitamin D ultraviolet-B (UVB) light absorption.
Obesity can lead to increased removal of fat, which results in less calcium for activation of Vitamin D.
In the elderly vitamin D production decreases as the storage of Vitamin D declines with age.
Decreased absorption of Vitamin D
Malabsorptive of vitamin D can be due to syndromes such as:
Crohn's disease: It is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) that causes inflammation of the digestive tract, which can lead to abdominal pain, severe diarrhea, fatigue, weight loss, and malnutrition.
Cystic fibrosis: It is an inherited disorder that causes severe damage to the lungs, digestive system, and other organs in the body.
Celiac disease: It is an immune reaction to eating gluten, a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye.
Cholestasis: It is a liver disease that occurs when the flow of bile from your liver is reduced or blocked. Bile is fluid produced by your liver that aids in the digestion of food, especially fats.
Surgical alteration: Like gastric bypass of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is associated with deficient absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K).
Alterations in the metabolism of Vitamin D
This can be due to the following reasons:
Pregnancy is associated with decreased levels of calcidiol (a form of vitamin D), and a dose of 1000 to 2000 international units (IU) per day is identified as Vitamin D deficiency in pregnant women. 
Liver diseases such as cirrhosis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (inflammation of the liver characterized by fat accumulation in the liver) can lead to deficient production of calcidiol.
Chronic kidney disease leads to structural damage and loss of 1-alpha-hydroxylase, an enzyme required for the activation of Vitamin D. 
Nephrotic syndrome (a kidney disorder that causes your body to pass too much protein in your urine) leads to pathologic excretion of Vitamin D binding protein (DBP), which binds to serum calcidiol.
Low levels of phosphorous (hypophosphatemia) or calcium (hypocalcemia) in blood
It is seen in the following diseases:
Renal tubular acidosis such as seen in Fanconi syndrome alter calcium and other ion absorption and excretion.
Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO), also known as oncogenic osteomalacia, is a rare acquired paraneoplastic disease (cancer caused due to auto-immune activity) characterized by hypophosphatemia and renal phosphate wasting. 
Medications
Drugs that can cause Vitamin D deficiency leading to osteomalacia are:
Phenobarbitone
Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Isoniazid
Rifampicin
Theophylline 
Ketoconazole
Long-term steroid
Etidronate
Fluoride
Risk Factors For Osteomalacia

Anyone who has Vitamin D deficiency is at risk of developing osteomalacia. These risks vary across the world and are contingent on geographic location, cultural preferences, and ethnicity. Individuals who are commonly affected in this way include people who:
Are too frail or ill to go outside
Live in climatic conditions with less exposure to sunlight
Usually stay or work indoors during the daylight hours
Wear clothing that covers a lot of their skin
Have dark skin which processes less Vitamin D from sunlight. This can include people from South Asian, Middle Eastern and Afro-Caribbean races.
Use very strong sunscreen
Are from low socio-economic status and have poor nutrition
Are pregnant and breastfeeding their children
Some of the rare risk factors of osteomalacia include:
Kidney failure
Liver diseases
Medications, such as antiepileptics, antifungals, or steroids.
Untreated coeliac disease
Surgery on the gastrointestinal tract.
Vitamin D, commonly known as the sunshine vitamin, is needed not just for the absorption of calcium but also for the proper function of the muscles and nerves. Understand the right way to take it.
Click Now!


 Diagnosis Of Osteomalacia

Osteomalacia is difficult to diagnose and no single laboratory finding is specific to it. However, the diagnosis of osteomalacia consists of:

History and physical examination
When evaluating for osteomalacia, a clinical history should include an understanding of a patient's family and surgical (like gastric bypass) history. Other relevant questions should focus on activity level, hobbies, diet, and assessment of socioeconomic status.

Blood tests
Serum calcium and phosphorous: Patients with osteomalacia will usually have hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia.
Serum alkaline phosphatase: An Increased alkaline phosphatase activity is typically characteristic of diseases with impaired osteoid mineralization. In fact, some sources believe that either hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia and increased bone alkaline phosphatase level are necessary even to suspect osteomalacia.
Serum Vitamin D: The serum level of 25(OH)D (vitamin D)is currently regarded as the best marker of vitamin D status and is usually severely low (<10 ng/mL) in patients with nutritional osteomalacia. 
Other sensitive biomarkers of early calcium deprivation include increased serum intact PTH (parathyroid hormone) and decreased urinary calcium.

The lack of exposure to the sun is causing a major impact on our body, especially on the Vitamin D levels. Read more about the causes of vitamin D deficiency and when to get yourself tested.
Tap Now!


Bone radiograph
Some of the significant radiographic findings suggestive of osteomalacia include:
Low bone mineral density (BMD) and focal uptake at Looser zones (pseudofractures) that can appear on bone scintigraphy (bone x-ray)
Poorly repaired insufficiency fractures are visible as transverse lucencies perpendicular to the osseous cortex. They typically occur bilaterally and symmetrically at the femoral necks, shafts, and pubic and ischial rami.
Decreased distinctness of vertebral body trabeculae (bone network) due to the inadequate mineralization of osteoid.
Although not required for diagnosis, studies have demonstrated reduced bone mineral density in the spine, hip, and forearm.
Bone biopsy
Iliac crest bone biopsy is considered the gold standard for establishing the diagnosis but should not be advised when the diagnosis is in doubt, or the cause of osteomalacia can be determined by other noninvasive methods.

Here are some of the definite or possible findings of osteomalacia, that would require further validation:
Hypophosphatemia or hypocalcemia
High bone alkaline phosphatase
Muscle weakness or bone pain
Less than 80% BMD of the young-adult-mean
Multiple uptake zones by bone scintigraphy or radiographic evidence of looser zones.
Prevention Of Osteomalacia

Osteomalacia is generally caused by a deficiency of Vitamin D due to inadequate sun exposure or a diet low in Vitamin D. it can be prevented to a larger extent by:
Eating foods high in Vitamin D
Adding naturally rich Vitamin D foods like salmon and egg yolks. 
Maintaining a well-balanced diet that contains fortified items with Vitamin D and calcium, such as cereal, bread, milk, and yogurt.
Taking supplements, if needed
Getting enough sun exposure
Understanding the underlying cause if there is a family history.
Did you know?
About 83% females and 85% males in India are reported to have low Vitamin D levels. Read more about how to get enough Vitamin D.
Click Here!
Specialist To Visit

Osteomalacia develops most commonly due to a Vitamin D deficiency often as a result of not getting enough sunlight and sometimes due to a digestive or kidney disorder. The doctors that are required to diagnose and treat osteomalacia are:
General physicians
Orthopedic
Rheumatologist
Endocrinologist
If you are having pain in the joints or bones or suspect vitamin deficiency seek help from our professionals. 
Consult Now!


Treatment Of Osteomalacia

The goals of therapy for vitamin D‐deficiency osteomalacia are to alleviate symptoms, promote fracture healing, restore bone strength, and improve quality of life while correcting the abnormalities. The treatment should focus on the healing of osteomalacia and the resolution of secondary hyperparathyroidism. It consists of: 

1. Maintaining PTH levels
There are no well‐established guidelines for this therapy. Most regimens targeted to maintain levels of serum 25OHD at >30 ng/mL and PTH levels within the reference range. With effective therapy, clinical symptoms begin to improve within a few weeks; however, complete resolution of symptoms may take several months. 

Following treatment, certain common findings are observed, like:
Increase of serum alkaline phosphatase that gradually decreases; in patients with prolonged Vitamin D deficiency
Hyperparathyroidism may persist for a long time
In rare cases it may progress to hypercalcemic tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Furthermore, depending on the amount of osteoid accumulation, a striking increase in BMD is observed, as seen after curing of osteomalacia.
2. Oral preparations of Vitamin D
Therapy consists of vitamin D in the range following range:
800 to 1200 IU daily oral doses 
50 000 IU of native vitamin D weekly for 8 to 12 weeks, followed by a maintenance dose of 1000 to 2000 IU daily
10,000 − 50,000 IU may be necessary in cases of impaired GI absorption.
Because these regimens may take a long time to reach vitamin D sufficiency, higher loading doses should not exceed 100 000 IU. 

3. Vitamin D with calcium: 
Treatment with Vitamin D must be always accompanied by adequate calcium supplements. One‐thousand milligrams of elementary calcium divided into two or three doses is sufficient in most cases. Higher amounts in the range of 2000 to 3000 mg daily are needed in patients with:
Malabsorption: After bariatric surgery or gastric bypass surgery, calcifediol (wherever available) can be utilized because it is a more polar metabolite that is absorbed via the portal system.
Hyperparathyroidism: The use of calcitriol along with Vitamin D may be preferred in these cases.
The use of another antiepileptic drug that does not interfere with vitamin D metabolism can be a choice.
Did you know?
The calcium from food can only get absorbed when you have enough vitamin D in the body. Read more about calcium-rich foods and supplements.
Click Here!
Home-care For Osteomalacia

Osteomalacia can cause problems with the bone formation or the bone-building process making the bones weak and susceptible to fractures. Along with the treatment, here are some tips that can help manage the symptoms:

1. Get adequate Vitamin D
The body makes its own Vitamin D when bare skin is exposed to sunlight. This can be enhanced by sun exposure during the morning hours.

While it is very important for bone health to get sunshine like this, you need to be careful not to get sunburned. Read about 5 sunscreen basics that you should know.
Tap To Read!

Certain food items also contain small amounts of vitamin D. They are:
Egg yolk
Oily fish
Red meat
Liver
Butter
Cereals
Fortified spreads
2. Add calcium for bone health
Calcium is needed to make bones strong and a lack of calcium can cause osteomalacia. Good sources of calcium include:
Tofu
Nuts
Soya beans
Fortified bread
Fish like sardines
Milk, cheese and other dairy products
Green leafy vegetables, like broccoli, cabbage, and okra, but not spinach
3. Make lifestyle modifications
There are many things you can do to promote healthy bones, such as:
Moderating the alcohol consumption
Eating a well-balanced diet
Not smoking
Maintaining a healthy weight
Taking proper supplements
4. Exercise regularly
Exercise helps to strengthen bones and muscles, which places some resistance against it making them stronger. This can include walking, running, or lifting weights. One should avoid intensive exercise while any fractures or cracks in the bones are healing.
Complications Of Osteomalacia

Due to poor osteoid mineralization, several complications can occur if osteomalacia is left untreated. Symptoms can return if the deficiency of vitamin D and underlying conditions like kidney failure is not addressed. Here are some of the complications:
Insufficiency fractures, also known as looser zones, can present as bone pain and occur with little or no trauma in the legs.
Reports also exist of looser zones in the ribs, scapulae, and clavicles.
Researchers have also reported kyphoscoliosis (deviation and excessive curvature of the spine)in long-standing osteomalacia
Also, in children, osteomalacia and rickets often occur together, which can lead to bowing of the legs or premature tooth loss.
Spinal compression fractures are less common and are usually associated with osteoporosis. 
Osteoporosis is a condition in which bones get thin and weak due to low bone density. This makes bones fragile and increases risk of fractures from slightest trauma. Read more about it.
Click Now!


 Alternative Therapies For Osteomalacia

Octreotide therapy for tumor-induced osteomalacia
Tumor-induced osteomalacia (also known as oncogenic osteomalacia) is a rare disorder characterized by phosphaturia (phosphorus in urine), hypophosphatemia (low levels of phosphorus in the blood), and osteomalacia. Tumor-induced osteomalacia develops because of tumors that are predominantly of benign origin4 but that may occasionally be malignant.

Surgical removal of the tumor may relieve all symptoms. Hemangiopericytoma (a type of rare tumor involving blood vessels and soft tissues)is the most common type of tumor-induced osteomalacia. Paraneoplastic secretion by the tumor of an unknown factor or factors termed “phosphatonins” that causes renal tubular phosphate wasting.

Studies have shown that subcutaneous administration of octreotide, a synthetic somatostatin analog, abolished renal tubular phosphate wasting before subsequent surgical removal of the tumor.

Phosphorus supplements
Next to calcium, phosphorus is the most abundant mineral in the body. About 85% of the body's phosphorus is in bones and teeth. Phosphorus is also needed to help balance and use other vitamins and minerals, including Vitamin D, iodine, magnesium, and zinc.

Most people get plenty of phosphorus in their diets. The mineral is found in milk, grains, and protein-rich foods. Some of the inorganic phosphorus supplements include:
Dibasic potassium phosphate
Monobasic potassium phosphate
Dibasic sodium phosphate
Monobasic sodium phosphate
Tribasic sodium phosphate
Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylserine
The recommended dosage is as follows:
Adults, 19 years and older: 700 mg
Pregnant and breastfeeding females: 700 mg
Note: Talk to your doctor before taking any supplements.
Living With Osteomalacia

Osteomalacia is a disease that weakens bones and can cause them to break more easily. It is a disorder of decreased mineralization, which results in the breaking down of bone matrix faster than its re-formation. It may be several months before any bone pain and muscle weakness is relieved. You should continue taking vitamin D supplements regularly to prevent the condition from returning. Osteomalacia can be managed by:
Having a diet rich in Vitamin D and calcium
Getting a healthy amount of sunshine
Eliminating gluten from the diet
Moderating the physical activities
Starting physiotherapy
Applying hot and cold compressions
Avoiding strenuous activities
Limiting the use of alcohol and aerated beverages
Avoiding certain medications like antiepileptics
Maintaining a healthy weight
Quitting smoking
Getting supplements for vitamins and minerals
Did you know?
Only meat, poultry and fish are not the only good sources of calcium but there are namely other options for vegetarians as well. Know more about 7 calcium rich foods for vegetarians.
Click To Read!
Frequently Asked Questions
Which population group is at the highest risk for developing osteomalacia?
Is it advisable to get a bone density scan for young patients suspected to have osteomalacia?
What to expect in the long term if one has been diagnosed with osteomalacia?
What is the difference between osteomalacia and osteoporosis?
Can osteomalacia cause osteoporosis?
Can osteomalacia be reversed?
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.