Cracked heels
Also known as Heel fissures and Split heels
Overview
Cracked heels is a common foot condition in which the skin on the heel becomes dry and hardened, resulting in splits due to the pressure of standing and walking.

The signs and symptoms of heel fissures include dry skin, a thick yellow or dark brown callus that causes pain and difficulty in walking.

Neglecting foot care, or lack of moisturizing, is often the main cause of cracked heels. It can also occur due to various other reasons, including wearing open-back shoes, being overweight, taking long hot showers, or having certain health conditions like diabetes or other skin disorders.

Treatment generally consists of over-the-counter products, insoles, liquid bandages, and certain home remedies. But if cracked heels are severe or infected, it may be necessary to see a medical professional to diagnose and treat the underlying cause.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women.
Body part(s) involved
Feet
Mimicking Conditions
Scabies 
Plaque psoriasis
Eczema (atopic dermatitis)
Ichthyosis
Allergic contact dermatitis.
Necessary health tests/imaging
Imaging tests: Dermoscopy, Wood's lamp examination, and Radiographs.
Blood tests: Complete blood count (CBC), Blood glucose test, and Nutritional tests
Pedobarographic studies
Skin biopsy
Treatment
Over-the-counter (OTC) products: Foot balms or moisturizers & Liquid bandages
Debriding agents: Salicylic acid, Urea, Silver nitrate, and Glycerol
Topical medications: Timolol
Strapping
Shoe inserts
Specialists to consult
General physician
Podiatrist (Foot Specialist)
Dermatologist (Skin Specialist)
Orthopedic
Symptoms Of Cracked heels
  The symptoms of heel fissures can vary in intensity from mild to severe. They include:
Visible cracks or split on the skin on the heels
Dry, hard, thickening of the skin around the rim of the heel
Callus formation with brown or yellow discoloration
Sensitivity or discomfort beneath the surface of the skin
If not treated, mild symptoms can worsen and develop into more severe ones like:
Pain while walking
Itching and bleeding from the fissures on the heels
Infection leading to warmth and redness
  Give your feet all the love and care they deserve. Shop from our foot care range.
Tap here
Causes Of Cracked Heels

Prolonged friction, pressure, or dryness can lead to the development of thick, hardened layers of dead skin, known as calluses. Calluses tend to easily crack if they become too dry or are constantly walked on. This can cause fissures to penetrate deeper layers of the skin, resulting in bleeding and discomfort. 
  Did you know?
People with diabetes often experience heel fissures. Diabetes can lead to nerve damage, particularly in the feet, which can result in reduced sweating and moisture. These heel fissures may predispose to foot ulcers that do not heal easily.

Explore our widest range of diabetes care products.
Check them out now
Risk Factors For Cracked Heels

Dehydration
It is one of the main reasons for cracked heels, as the skin on the feet's soles tends to lose moisture more easily when dehydrated.
  Learn more about 8 signs of dehydration that you cannot miss.
Read this

Athlete's foot
It is a type of fungal infection that appears as a scaly rash and may result in the formation of cracked skin on the heels.

Eczema
Also known as atopic dermatitis, it causes dry, inflamed, and cracked skin, which can lead to heel fissures.
  Tired of itchy skin?
Listen to our experts talk about ways to manage eczema.
Watch this video now

Uncontrolled diabetes 
It can lead to neuropathy, which is a type of nerve dysfunction that damages the nerves responsible for sweating. This raises the likelihood of individuals developing calluses and cracked heels.
  Learn about diabetes care.
Click here

Hypothyroidism 
It is a condition where the thyroid gland does not produce sufficient hormones. When thyroid hormone levels are low, the body's metabolism slows down, leading to decreased production of natural oils that keep the skin moisturized. This can cause dry and cracked feet.

Palmoplantar psoriasis 
It is a specific form of psoriasis that occurs on the palms and soles of the feet, leading to the formation of pustules(lesions), calluses, and cracks on the heels.
  Check out our widest range of products curated especially to give you some relief from psoriasis.
Explore now

Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Also known as sweaty sock syndrome or wet sock dermatitis, this is a skin condition that primarily affects children, between the ages of 3 and 14 years. It is characterized by red, dry, and scaly patches on the soles of the feet.
Sjogren's Syndrome 
It is a rare disorder in which the body's immune system targets and damages glands responsible for producing sweat and moisture, resulting in dry skin.
Obesity
Studies suggest that obesity can cause skin changes. Individuals who are obese may have a higher likelihood of experiencing cracked heels due to the additional weight-adding pressure on the heels.
  Finding it difficult to reach your weight loss goals? Try weight management products.
Click here
Pregnancy
The hormonal changes, weight gain, and increased pressure on the feet during pregnancy can contribute to skin dryness leading to cracked heels. 

Bump ahead?
We have a well-designed plan for all moms-to-be to help you sail through this beautiful journey with ease.
Check out now

Aging
As you age, the skin tends to become thinner, drier, and less elastic, reducing the production of natural oils that keep the skin moisturized, resulting in dryness and can contribute to cracked heels.
Other factors
There are additional factors related to the environment and body mechanics that may also be important.
Living in dry and cold climates
Taking long and hot showers
Poorly fitted or open footwear (does not cover the back of the foot)
Spending long periods of time standing, especially on hard surfaces
Excessive running, jogging, and climbing that involve significant pressure and friction on the feet
Occupations that involve constant friction or pressure on the skin, such as athletes or construction workers.
Diagnosis Of Cracked Heels

Cracked heels are generally noticeable on the physical examination itself, but your doctor may conduct a few tests to diagnose the underlying cause. The diagnosis of cracked heels may require the following:
1. Medical history and physical examination
During the examination, the doctor will look for signs of cracked heels and may ask about the type of shoes worn and any past treatments. They will also inquire about your walking style and foot positioning to identify any potential mechanical problems.
2. Laboratory tests
The doctor may use other tests to find out what is causing cracked heels.
Blood tests: These are not typically done specifically for cracked feet. However, some blood tests that may be considered to find the underlying cause may include:
Complete blood count (CBC): This test helps detect signs of infection or inflammation.
Blood glucose test: Measures the level of glucose (sugar) in the blood and is used to check for diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance, which can affect skin health.
Nutritional tests: Certain deficiencies, such as in vitamins A, C, D, and E, can affect skin health, and blood tests can identify these deficiencies.
Pedobarographic studies: Pedobarographs also known as pressure studies can be used to identify areas that have high pressure on the feet, which can be linked to cracked heels.
Skin biopsy: In certain cases, a skin tissue biopsy is performed and sent to a laboratory for l examination. The pathologist looks at the sample under a microscope and considers other information, such as medical history, to determine a diagnosis. 
3. Imaging tests
These are not usually done but may be required to determine the exact cause of a fissure heel. These include:
Dermoscopy: It is a technique using a dermatoscopy, a handheld device that illuminates and magnifies the skin. It is a non-invasive tool for the diagnosis of skin conditions.
Wood's lamp examination: In this examination, the doctor uses ultraviolet light to examine the skin to detect any underlying skin conditions or infections.
Radiographs: Weight-bearing foot X-rays can be used to identify bony protrusions that contribute to the development of cracked heels.

Book your tests with Tata 1mg labs for faster and more accurate results.
Get tested now
Prevention Of Cracked Heels

There are a number of approaches that help to prevent the development of cracked heels. These include:
Make sure to apply moisturizer to your feet regularly, both in the morning and at night, in order to maintain soft and smooth skin.
Exfoliate regularly using a gentle foot scrub or pumice to prevent the buildup of excess dead skin cells.
Wear shoes that fit well and are not too tight or too loose. 
Avoid walking barefoot on rough surfaces regularly as it can cause heel damage and dryness. 
Wear non-skid socks or house slippers at home.
Use heel cups in your shoes. These can be bought at drugstores or sports stores as they help alleviate stress on your heels.
Examine your feet every day to identify any initial indications that cracks may be forming.
Keep yourself hydrated to avoid dehydration or dryness.
  Looking for ways to heal and moisturize your cracked heels? Check out some effective remedies.
Know more
Specialist to visit

Cracked heels may not be a serious health concern, but neglecting their treatment can lead to discomfort and inconvenience. Doctors who can help diagnose and treat cracked heels include:
General physician
Podiatrist 
Dermatologist 
Orthopedic

A general physician can help diagnose and treat any underlying cause of cracked feet. 
A podiatrist is a foot specialist who uses techniques like debridement to remove dead skin and prevent heel cracking.
Dermatologists are specialists who can diagnose and treat skin conditions. 
Orthopedics are specialists in bones, muscles, and joints who can help identify underlying bony conditions causing cracked heels along with various treatment options.


When to visit a doctor?
See a doctor if:
Cracked heels are causing you pain or discomfort
Are interfering with your daily activities
You have health conditions such as diabetes, poor circulation, or other serious illnesses.
  Do not take these symptoms lightly and talk to an expert to get professional guidance and treatment.
Book your appointment now
Treatment Of Cracked heels
The treatment of cracked heels is determined by the severity of the condition and the underlying cause. It generally consists of the following:
1. Over-the-counter (OTC) treatment
Foot balms or moisturizers: Applying healing balms or moisturizers that contain humectants (water-retaining agents) can effectively treat cracked heels. Regularly massaging the heels with a moisturizing lotion or balm can keep the skin soft and hydrated. 

Try our widest range of moisturizers to keep your feet healthy and happy.
Shop now

Liquid bandage: It should be applied around the affected area and left on for a sufficient amount of time to seal the cracks. Liquid bandages not only seal existing cracks but also provide protection against infections and prevent future cracking. 
2. Professional treatment
If the heels are severely damaged or if self-treatment does not show improvement after a week, it may be necessary to seek professional help.
Prescription debriding agents: These creams contain higher amounts of active ingredients such as salicylic acid, urea, silver nitrate, and cream with 10% glycerol. These medications assist in removing debris and dead tissue from wounds, aiding in the healing process and decreasing the risk of infection.
Topical medications: Topical timolol helps to restore the skin barrier and aid in the healing of deep and painful cracked heels.
Debridement: This is a medical procedure where a doctor removes the tough and damaged skin on your heels.
  Note: This shouldn't be done at home using a razor blade or scissors, as there's a risk of infection and removing too much skin.
  Strapping: In order to promote healing, your doctor will wrap a bandage tightly around your cracked heels to keep the affected skin from moving.

Shoe inserts: You may recommend using shoe inserts to redistribute weight and provide better support for the heel. They may also suggest using heel pads or cups to support the heel.

Using silicone heel cups can be beneficial as they reduce pressure on the feet and provide shock absorption.
Buy them here

Tissue glue or adhesives: Tissue glue has the ability to effectively treat cracked heels by holding the deep fissures together.
Home Care For Cracked Heels

Cracked heels aren’t a cause for serious concern. You may be able to relieve it with over-the-counter or by simply applying heel balms or moisturizers. Additionally, there are home remedies that can treat dry and cracked heels and prevent their recurrence. They include:
Honey (Madhu): The healing properties of honey can help heal cracks in the feet by acting as a natural antiseptic and moisturizer, preventing dryness.

How to use it? 
Mix a cup of honey with lukewarm water in a tub and soak your clean feet for 15-20 minutes while massaging them. Once finished, dry your feet and apply a moisturizer. 
Coconut oil (Nariyal tel): Coconut oil is highly effective at moisturizing the skin and reducing inflammation, which can help fight infections due to deep heel fissures.

How to use it?
Apply a generous amount of coconut oil to your heels to benefit from these properties.

Check out our exclusive range of coconut oils.
Tap here
Oatmeal: Colloidal oatmeal is highly regarded for its ability to reduce inflammation and provide antioxidant benefits. Research has demonstrated its effectiveness in treating dry, scaly, and rough skin. 

How to use it?
Mix colloidal oatmeal with coconut oil till it becomes a paste. Apply the paste to your cracked heels, let it sit for 20-30 minutes, and then gently scrub and rinse off with lukewarm water.

Apple cider vinegar: It possesses antibacterial and anti-inflammatory qualities that can provide relief and prevent infection in heel cracks.

How to use it?
Mix 1 part vinegar with 2 parts cool water in a large bowl and soak your feet in the solution for 5 to 10 minutes.
  Buy apple cider vinegar products.
Click here
Banana (Kela): They are a great source of essential nutrients that can improve skin elasticity and keep feet hydrated. Researchers have discovered that an anti-heel crack band made from banana peel gel is very effective for treating cracked heels. 

How to use it?
Mash two ripe bananas into a paste and apply it to your cracked heels. Rinse your feet with lukewarm water after 30 minutes, and repeat this process daily for two weeks for optimal results.

Aloe vera: It is used in the treatment of dry skin due to its moisturizing effect. The vitamins and minerals present in aloe vera contain powerful antioxidants that can help in the regeneration of the skin. 

How to use it?
Directly apply aloe vera gel on cracked heels to increase to heal the cracks.
  Try aloe vera products.
Tap now
Turmeric (Haldi): It has anti-inflammatory and antiseptic properties that can be used to prevent infections due to cracked heels. 

How to use it?
Mix castor oil with a pinch of turmeric powder to treat the cracks.
  Listen to our expert talk about a few other tips to get rid of cracked heels.
Watch the video

Complications Of Cracked heels

Cracked heels may seem like a small issue, but if not treated promptly, they can lead to certain complications like:
Loss of feeling in your heel: This may occur when deep cracks or fissures extend into the underlying tissues, affecting nerves and reducing sensitivity.
Cellulitis: Heel fissures can cause open sores that can become infected and lead to a painful skin infection.
Foot ulcers: Deeply cracked heels can provide an entry point for bacteria, leading to infection and tissue damage.
Emotional stress: This is caused by concerns related to one's appearance. Symptoms that keep returning and can make it hard to walk or stand, which can have a negative impact on quality of life.

Take care of your mind as you would take care of your body.
Try mind care range
 Alternative Therapies For Cracked Heels

Along with self-care and home remedies, there are certain alternative therapies as well that can provide some relief from cracked heels. They include:

Ayurveda
Ayurvedic doctors recommend using herbal ointments containing various natural ingredients to treat cracked heels. Ayurveda also suggests regularly massaging the cracked heels with warm sesame oil that is calming for Vata dosha (one of the three energies in our body that takes care of body movements).

Yoga
It is possible to treat cracked heels with specific yoga asanas. Yoga can aid in circulation, and foot flexibility, and promote stress reduction, while also encouraging mindfulness about foot care and enhancing balance and posture. 

Yoga can benefit you in ways that you couldn't have imagined. Know more about the overall health benefits of yoga.
Enlighten yourself
Living With Cracked Heels

Though it may not seem like a big problem, living with cracked heels can significantly impact one's quality of life, causing discomfort, pain, and limitations in daily activities due to difficulty in walking or standing comfortably. Here are a few things you can do to pamper your feet:
Limit bath time
Do not shower for more than 5-10 minutes. Bathing for too long can make your skin dry and cracked heels worse. Also, do not rub your skin with harsh towels.

Go gentle with products
Always opt for mild, fragrance-free cleansers while cleaning your feet. This can help your feet retain their natural oils.

Do not forget to exfoliate
The skin on your heels is thicker than the skin on the rest of your body, which makes it more likely to become dry and crack. To alleviate cracked heels, you can soak your feet in lukewarm water and gently exfoliate the hard skin with a pumice stone, loofah, or foot file. Using foot scrub creams daily can also help.

Never skip moisturization
The best practice is to moisturize within 5 minutes of bathing and apply it to your heels immediately after bathing while your skin is still damp to lock in the moisture.

Set a bedtime ritual
Soak your feet in plain or soapy water for around 10 minutes, and dry gently. Exfoliate your heels gently and apply a richer, oil-based cream or petroleum jelly. Then wear thin cotton socks to enhance the moisturizing effect.

Protect your heels
Coat the cracks in your heels with a liquid bandage to form a protective shield, promoting faster healing, reducing discomfort, and preventing germs from entering the skin. Also, wear proper fitting shoes to avoid any discomfort.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the difference between cracked heels and calluses?
How do you know if a cracked heel is infected?
Is Vicks good for hard skin on feet?
What is a heel cyst?
What is the lipoma of the heel?
References
Vanessa Ngan. Cracked Heels. DermNet NZ. Published online 2006.
Cracked Heels: stop them in their tracks. Best Practice Advocacy Centre New Zealand. Published online 2014.
Vlahovic TC, Hinton EA, Chakravarthy D, et al. A review of cyanoacrylate liquid skin protectant and its efficacy on pedal fissures. Journal of the American College of Certified Wound Specialists; Published online 15th Mar. 2011.
Kumar, Hari Kishan; Naveen, S; Shankar, Keerthi. Juvenile plantar dermatosis: A barrier disease beyond eczema. Indian Journal of Paediatric Dermatology 17(1):p 13-17, Jan–Mar 2016. | DOI: 10.4103/2319-7250.173158.
Darlenski R, Mihaylova V, Handjieva-Darlenska T. The Link Between Obesity and the Skin. Front Nutr. 2022 Mar 10;9:855573.
Belinda Longhurst & Carol Steele. Dry Heel Fissures: Treatment and Prevention. Dermatological Nursing, 2016, Vol 15, No 3. Available online:
Myron Bodman. Diagnosing A Patient With Painful Cracks On Both Soles. Podiatry Today. Published online Feb. 2018.
Chatterjee M, Neema S. Dermatoscopy of Infections and Infestations. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2021 Jan 16;12(1):14-23.
M Sivakumar, et al. Prevalence and correlates of fissure foot in a rural area in Tamilnadu
Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology. Published online Jan. 1999.
Amanda Oakley. Juvenile plantar dermatosis. DermNet NZ. Updated online 2006.
Pauline McLoone,et al. Honey: A Therapeutic Agent for Disorders of the Skin. Published online 4th Aug. 2016.
How to care for dry, cracked heels. American Academy of dermatology association. Updated online 31st Jan. 2022.
Amira Skopljak. Pedobarography in diagnosis and clinical application. National Center for Biotechnology Information. Published online 22nd Dec. 2014.
P. H. Wadekar et al. A Review on Heel Fissures and its Management. International Journal of Research in Engineering, Science and Management Volume 4, Issue 2, February 2021 | ISSN (Online): 2581-5792.
Dale Kern, et al.Treatment of plantar hyperkeratosis with a combination 10 % urea and 8 % glycerin topical cream. PennState College of information science & technology.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.