Nose bleeding
Also known as Epistaxis
Overview

Nose bleeding is characterized by blood flow from one or both nostrils lasting for a few seconds to 15 minutes. It is quite common and many people experience it now and again. But it is most frequently seen in children between 2 to 10 years of age, elderly people, pregnant women, and people taking blood thinning medication. 

The common causes of nosebleeds include picking the nose, blowing the nose very hard,  a minor injury to the nose, and changes in humidity or temperature causing the inside of the nose to become dry and cracked. 

Nose bleeding can be prevented by avoiding picking the nose and keeping the fingernails short, blowing the nose as little as possible, and wearing a head guard during activities in which the nose or head could get injured

It is usually not serious and can be controlled at home. However, recurrent heavy nose bleeding should be medically evaluated for timely diagnosis and treatment.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children aged 2-10 years and adults aged 50-80 years
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Nose
Mimicking Conditions
Nasal tumor
DIC (Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) 
Hemophilia
Von Willebrand disease
Rhinitis
Foreign body in the nose
Drug toxicity (Warfarin, NSAIDs)
Necessary health tests/imaging
Lab tests 
Complete blood count (CBC)
Coagulation studies -prothrombin time & partial thromboplastin time (PPT)

Imaging tests 
Computed Tomography (CT) 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) 
Treatment
Medications 
Oxymetazoline and phenylephrine hydrochloride  tranexamic acid 
Nasal packing 
Cauterization
Embolization
Septal surgery 
Ligation 
Specialists to consult
ENT specialist
Symptoms Of Nose bleeding

The signs and symptoms of nose bleeding include:

Bleeding from either or both nostrils
Sensation of flowing liquid at the back of the throat
Excess blood loss from the nose may lead to dizziness, fainting, and confusion 
Causes Of Nose bleeding

The inside of the nose consists of tiny, delicate blood vessels that can become damaged and bleed relatively easily. Some of the common causes of nosebleeds include:

Dry air can be caused by hot, low-humidity climates or heated indoor air. The environment causes the nasal membrane to dry out and become crusty or cracked and more likely to bleed when rubbed
Blowing the nose with force 
Nose picking 
A minor injury to the nose
Inserting objects into the nose
Cold or allergies 
Blood thinning drugs (aspirin and warfarin) reduce the blood's ability to clot and hence prolong bleeding 
Repeated use of nasal sprays to treat allergies can dry out the nasal membrane 
Inhaling chemical irritants such as ammonia can begin to burn away the lining of the nose if inhaled for a longer time
Snorting cocaine can cause nasal problems like permanent physical damage or nose bleeds
The deviated septum can block one side of the nose and reduce airflow, leading to crusting or nose bleeding in certain people

Some of the other less common causes of nosebleeds include:

High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Although there is no direct link between nosebleeds being a signs of high blood pressure, a hypertensive crisis consisting of a sudden, severe increase in blood pressure can cause increased pressure in the blood vessels and lead to nosebleeds.

Is your blood pressure under control?

Explore our wide range of BP monitors to check your BP in the comfort of your home.
Click to shop

Nasal tumors: These tumors can cause blockage in the nose and lead to a decreased sense of smell and nosebleeds

Inflammatory conditions: Various types of inflammatory or granulomatous disease within the nasal cavity can cause bleeding. Some of the common examples include
Bacterial sinusitis- A bacterial infection of the sinuses, the hollow spaces in the bones of the face around the nose.
Allergic rhinitis-  It is inflammation of the inside of the nose caused by allergens, such as pollen, dust, and mold.
Nasal polyposis- It is noncancerous growth on the lining of your nasal passages or sinuses.
Wegner granulomatosis- Inflammation of the blood vessels of the nose.
Tuberculosis- It is an infectious disease that usually affects the lungs.

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT): It is a genetic vascular disorder, which leads to the development of small lesions called telangiectasia, which can burst and bleed.

Pregnancy: Nosebleeds can be experienced during pregnancy on account of hormonal changes. 
Types Of Nose bleeding

Nose bleeding is described by the site of the bleeding. The two main types of nose bleeding are: 
Anterior nose bleeding
It originates towards the front of the nose and causes blood to flow out through the nostrils.  Capillaries and small blood vessels in this area of the nose are fragile and can easily break and bleed. This is the most common nosebleed found in children and is usually not serious. 
Posterior nose bleeding 
It originates toward the back of the nasal passage, near the throat. Posterior nosebleeds are considered to be more serious than anterior nosebleeds. It causes heavy bleeding, which may flow down the back of the throat and is more common in adults. 
Risk Factors For Nose bleeding 

Atmospheric changes 
Conditions like high altitudes, dry climatic conditions, and cold weather are known to dry out the nasal membrane and cause nose bleeding. 
Habits 
Certain habits like putting a finger in the nose or aggressively picking the nose can lead to tearing of the nasal mucous membrane leading to epistaxis. 
History of bleeding disorders 
Individuals having a history of blood clotting disorders can have heavy bleeding in the case of any nasal injury. 
Inflammatory conditions
Individuals with various inflammatory conditions like the common cold, sinusitis, allergies, and nasal polyps are known to have nose bleeding as a common symptom. 
Blood thinning medications
Individuals with prolonged use of anticoagulants (blood-thinning drugs) like aspirin, and warfarin are known to bleed easily as these drugs have blood-thinning properties. 
Stress
Stress and anxiety are risk factors for nose bleeding. Research has shown that individuals having psychological issues are at a higher risk for chronic, recurring, or unexpected nosebleeds.
If a person is feeling anxious then he tends to pick his nose which could also trigger bleeding. 

Is stress affecting your overall well-being? Try some relaxation techniques to manage stress.
Tap to explore
Smoking and excessive alcohol intake 
Nicotine is a dangerous substance in cigarettes that can act as an irritant in the nasal mucosa and cause nose bleeding. Excessive alcohol intake can also lead to epistaxis as alcohol inhibits blood clotting and dilates the blood vessels. 

Looking to quit smoking? Try our range of smoking cessation products and detach yourself from this deadly habit.
Buy now

Diagnosis Of Nose bleeding 

History 
If an individual is experiencing nose bleeding the doctor would ask questions like:

Duration of the nosebleed
How often do you experience nose bleeding
Amount of blood lost during the incident 
Drug history to point out the use of drugs that may promote bleeding, including aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), other antiplatelet drugs heparin, and warfarin.
History of smoking or alcohol intake
History of bleeding disorders (including family history) and conditions associated with defects in platelets or coagulation, particularly cancer, cirrhosis, HIV, and pregnancy.

Physical Examination 
Vitals are evaluated. With active bleeding, treatment usually takes place simultaneously with evaluation.
Examination of the nose is done to determine the source of the bleeding and what may have caused it. Equipment like a small speculum is used to hold the nostril open. Various light sources like a headlamp or an endoscope (lighted scope) are used to check the inside of the nasal passages.
A topical spray with anesthetic and epinephrine is helpful for vasoconstriction to help in controlling the bleeding and to aid in the visualization of the source. 

Lab tests 
Lab tests are rarely required to diagnose nosebleeding.  In certain severe conditions following tests are done:
Complete blood count (CBC): For individuals having nose bleeding, a CBC is done to map the reduced hemoglobin level for bleeding management in patients with heavy and recurrent nosebleeds. 
Coagulation studies: Patients with symptoms or signs of a bleeding disorder and those with severe or recurrent epistaxis are evaluated for prothrombin time (measures the time it takes for a clot to form in a blood sample), and partial thromboplastin time (a blood test that looks at how long it takes for blood to clot). 

Booking your lab tests just got easier. Get all the tests done in the comfort and safety of your home.
Find all the tests here
Imaging studies 
Tests like Computed Tomography (CT) scans and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) may be rarely indicated in cases where a malignancy or growth is suspected.
Prevention Of Nose bleeding

The following pointers can help in preventing nose bleeding:
General measures
Avoid blowing your nose too forcefully
Use a saline nasal spray or drops 2-3 times a day in each nostril to keep your nasal passages moist 
Avoid picking your nose and keep the fingernails short
At night keep the air moist by using room humidifiers 
Wear protective headgear if involved in activities that could result in an injury to the face and nose

Consider changing medications that increase bleeding
Blood thinning medications such as aspirin and ibuprofen can increase bleeding. Consult your doctor for their replacement.

Avoid drinking and smoking
Overconsumption of alcohol and smoking can act as an irritant in the nasal mucosa and can cause nose bleeding. Quitting smoking and drinking is always a good idea.

Looking to quit smoking, but finding it very difficult? Read about some practical ways that will help you get rid of this unhealthy habit.
Check out
Consume vitamin K-rich foods 
Vitamin K-rich foods like spinach, mustard greens, kale broccoli, and cabbage, are involved in the formation of collagen that helps in creating a moist lining inside the nose. Vitamin K  helps keep the blood vessels in good condition preventing them from rupturing easily and green leafy vegetables also facilitate blood clotting. 

Load your diet with Vitamin C-rich foods 
Vitamin C-containing foods or supplements on a daily basis may help make the blood vessels become stronger and thus less vulnerable to rupture and cause nose bleeding. 

Fill any gaps in your Vitamin C levels with dietary supplements. Check out our wide range of supplements.
Explore now
Stay hydrated 
Not drinking an adequate amount of water in a day can also dry the mucous membranes causing nose bleeds. Therefore, it is recommended to have enough water throughout the day. 

Understand how drinking water can be beneficial for your overall health.
Watch this video now
Specialist To Visit

Doctors that can help you diagnose and treat nose bleeding include:
ENT specialist

An ENT specialist, also called an otolaryngologist, is a doctor who has special training in diagnosing and treating diseases of the ear, nose, and throat. An ENT specialist can diagnose the condition and, if needed, can also look deep inside the nose using a special camera or endoscope to both treat the problem and ensure there isn't a more serious condition like a tumor or malignancy causing it.

Seek medical help from our trusted team of doctors.
Book your appointment now
Treatment Of Nose bleeding

The doctor will attempt to stop the bleeding as the first course of action. The doctor may also assess the person’s blood pressure and pulse.
Treatment depends on the cause and could include: 
Medications 
Nasal sprays can be used at the time of bleeding. Oxymetazoline and phenylephrine hydrochloride (Neofrin) can be used short-term to help with congestion and minor bleeding if a person is not having high blood pressure. 
Oral or topical tranexamic acid is effective in stopping bleeding for a 10-day period after a single application. 
Nasal packing 
A doctor may insert ribbon gauze, nasal sponges, foam, or an inflatable latex balloon into the nose to create pressure at the site of the bleeding. The material is often kept in the nasal cavity for 24 to 48 hours. 
Cauterization
In this procedure heat energy (electrocautery), and a chemical substance (silver nitrate) are used to seal the bleeding blood vessel
Embolization
It is a procedure in which tiny particles such as gelatin sponges or beads, are used to block a blood vessel. This procedure will stop the bleeding from the nose. However, doctors rarely recommend this for nosebleeds.
Septal surgery 
If a deviated septum is causing frequent nosebleeds, a doctor may straighten it during surgery.
Ligation 
This is a surgical procedure that involves tying the ends of the identified blood vessels or arteries causing the bleeding. Doctors often use this procedure if other treatment options have not worked.
Home Care For Nose bleeding

If you find yourself in a situation where blood is bleeding from your nose. Follow the following steps:
Relax and make yourself calm
Sit upright and lean your body and your head slightly forward
Breathe through your nose
Pinch together the soft part of the nose to stop bleeding 
If your nose is still bleeding, continue squeezing the nose for another 5 minutes
You can also apply cold compression to the bridge of your nose for a few minutes. This will help constrict blood vessels and stop bleeding.
After the bleeding stops, do not bend over, strain, or lift any heavy objects

Here are a few home remedies that can help relieve nose bleeding. It is always better to take consent from your doctor before trying these:
Saline water 
Dryness during the winter season in the nasal membrane is one of the most common causes of nose bleeding. To solve this problem, soothe and moisturize the nasal membranes with saline water. Saline water can be made by adding some water in a bowl and in this adding a few drops of saline solution, and mixing them well. Put a few drops of this solution in your nose to moisten the inner lining of the nasal passages.
Apple cider vinegar (ACV)
The acid present in the ACV  helps constrict the blood vessels, thus stopping the bleeding. Dip a cotton ball in vinegar and place it in the affected nostril for about 5 to 10 minutes, this usually stops bleeding in one go. 
Nettle leaf 
Nettle leaves work as a natural astringent and a hemostatic agent. Nettle's solution helps keep allergy-related nosebleeds in control. The leaves can be brewed and tea is made. Once the solution cools down, dip the cotton pad in the solution and place it on the nose, for 5-10 minutes until the bleeding stops.
Complications Of Nose bleeding

Frequent nosebleeds can lead to various complications like
Sinusitis: During sinusitis, there is inflammation and swelling in the nose. It leads to damage to the nasal blood vessels resulting in nosebleeds. 
External nasal deformity: Nasal deformities are abnormalities in the shape or structure of the nose. In some cases, the deformity can be a result of trauma or nose bleeding. 
Hemorrhage: Sudden nose bleeding if severe with excessive bleeding can lead to hemorrhage.
Cardio-vascular compromise: In certain life-threatening cases, especially following surgery, nose bleeding can lead to cardio-vascular shock which can prove to be fatal.
Anemia: Episodes of chronic nose bleeding for a long duration can lead to anemia from blood loss.
Frequently Asked Questions
How long does nose bleeding usually last?
What to avoid in the case of nose bleeding?
What is the main cause of nose bleeding?
Can nose bleeding cause weakness?
References
Sharathkumar AA, Shapiro A. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Haemophilia. 2008 Nov;14.
Seidel DU, Jacob L, Kostev K, Sesterhenn AM. Risk factors for epistaxis in patients followed in general practices in Germany. Rhinology. 2017 Dec.
Robinson AE, McAuliffe W, Phillips TJ, Phatouros CC, Singh TP. Embolization for the treatment of intractable epistaxis: 12 month outcomes in a two centre case series. Br J Radiol. 2017 Dec.
Tabassom A, Cho JJ. Epistaxis. [Updated 2022 Sep 12]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-.
Beck R, Sorge M, Schneider A, Dietz A. Current Approaches to Epistaxis Treatment in Primary and Secondary Care. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Jan 8;
Morgan DJ, Kellerman R. Epistaxis: evaluation and treatment. Prim Care. 2014 Mar;
Erwin SA. Epistaxis. How to control the persistent nosebleed. Postgrad Med. 1987 Sep 15.
Nosebleed. NHS inform. 14 March 2023.
M, Poetker DM, Riley CA, Schneider JS, Seidman MD, Vadlamudi V, Valdez TA, Nnacheta LC, Monjur TM. Clinical Practice Guideline: Nosebleed (Epistaxis). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2020 Jan;162(1_suppl):S1-S38.
Randall DA, Freeman SB. Management of anterior and posterior epistaxis. Am Fam Physician. 1991 Jun;4.
Did our information help you?
In our relentless endeavour to keep improving our services, you are our eyes. Kindly take out sometime to guide us on how to serve your better.
Share your feedback
Subscribe to stay informed
Subscribe to our carefully crafted informative emailers by Medical Experts and be the first to get the latest health news, tips and important updates.
Submit
Disclaimer
Tata 1mg's sole intention is to ensure that its consumers get information that is expert-reviewed, accurate and trustworthy. However, the information contained herein should NOT be used as a substitute for the advice of a qualified physician. The information provided here is for informational purposes only. This may not cover all possible side effects, drug interactions or warnings or alerts. Please consult your doctor and discuss all your queries related to any disease or medicine. We intend to support, not replace, the doctor-patient relationship.