Gestational diabetes
Also known as Gestational diabetes mellitus, GDM, Pregnancy-induced diabetes, and Type III diabetes
Overview

Gestational diabetes refers to the high blood glucose that is diagnosed first time during pregnancy. It mostly develops during the second and third trimester of pregnancy. It can also include undiagnosed type 2 diabetes identified early in pregnancy. 

The major cause of gestational diabetes are the release of placental hormones that contribute to the increase in the blood glucose. 

The factors that can increase the risk of gestational diabetes include increased body weight, decreased physical activity, family history of diabetes, polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), and prior history of gestational diabetes. 

Managing gestational diabetes is very important to avoid both fetal and maternal complications. Dietary and lifestyle modifications are the cornerstone treatment approaches for this condition. In case of failure of these conventional approaches, insulin might be required. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Women aged between 35 to 39 years of age
Gender affected
Women
Body part(s) involved
Pancreas
Necessary health tests/imaging
Glucose challenge test
Oral glucose tolerance test
Treatment
Dietary modifications
Exercise
Insulin
Specialists to consult
Physician
Diabetologist
Endocrinologist
Nutritionist
Neonatologist
Obstetrician
Symptoms Of Gestational diabetes

In most of the cases, gestational diabetes does not have any symptoms. So, screening is very important to diagnose the condition. 

Some women might have mild symptoms such as:

Increased urination
Increased thirst
Fatigue
Nausea
Vomiting
Weight loss in spite of eating more

If the blood sugar levels are very high, women may experience: 

Blurred vision
Delayed wound healing
Genital itching
Diabetes can cause dry mouth
Dry mouth is a common symptom of high blood sugar. It can worsen the side effects of diabetes and increase the sugar level of the body. Here are several other causes of dry mouth.
Tap To Read!
Causes Of Gestational Diabetes

Diabetes is characterized by high blood glucose levels in the blood. Normally, the level of glucose is maintained by a hormone called insulin. Insulin helps in the utilization of the glucose. During pregnancy, the sensitivity of insulin is reduced by about 56% via: 

Placental hormones: Such as human placental lactogen (hPL), human placental growth hormone (hPGH), growth hormone (GH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), prolactin (PRL), estrogens, and gestagens. 
Inflammatory chemicals: Such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), IL-6, resistin, and C-reactive protein (CRP).
Glucose: Produced by the body for the fetus. Studies suggest that endogenous glucose production is increased by 30% in the third trimester of pregnancy. 

In most cases, adaptation occurs in the body by increasing the secretion of insulin. But, gestational diabetes happens if insulin secretion is not able to withstand the demand.

Learn more about gestational diabetes from our experts.
Watch this video
Types Of Gestational Diabetes

Gestational diabetes is classified according to the treatment approach:
1. A1GDM
GDM that is managed without taking any medication is termed A1GDM. Here, the treatment approach includes dietary modifications.
2. A2GDM
The term A2GDM refers to blood glucose that needs to be managed with the help of medications.
Risk Factors For Gestational Diabetes

Gestational diabetes increases the risk of developing type 2 diabetes both in the mother and baby. It can also be turned out as a cause of obesity in the later life of the child. It is always advisable to get tested for diabetes in the second and third trimester of pregnancy.
The chances of developing diabetes in pregnancy increase with the following risk factors:
1. Age
The prevalence of diabetes is more common in women over 30 years of age. Women at the age of 35-39 are at the highest risk of developing gestational diabetes. 

There are several changes in the woman’s body as she turns 30. Explore what the 30s have in store for every woman!
Read this now

2. Being overweight and obesity
Pregnant women having BMI greater than 25 have more chances of developing complications such as diabetes during pregnancy. 

Being overweight or obese causes hormonal imbalances in women which in turn negatively affects their ovulation and menstrual cycles. Know more about how obesity can impact fertility, pregnancy, and childbirth. 

Read To Know!

3. Decreased physical activity
There is an increased risk of gestational diabetes in women living a sedentary lifestyle. 

4. Western diet
Studies suggest that the “Western pattern” diet that includes food such as red meat, processed meat, refined grain products, sweets, french fries, and pizzas is associated with an increased risk of GDM. 

5. Lack of vitamins and minerals
The deficiencies of certain vitamins and minerals also predispose women to develop gestational diabetes. It is seen that women whose intake of Vitamin C is less than 70 mg/day have 1.8 times increased risk of GDM. 

Note: Lack of Vitamin D is also associated with an increased risk of gestational diabetes. 

Get your Vitamin D levels checked from the comfort of your home to know whether or not you have the deficiency.
Book your test now

6. Dyslipidemia
It refers to high levels of bad cholesterol and low levels of good cholesterol in the blood. The triglycerides greater than 250 mg/dl and HDL levels less than 35 mg/dl indicate the risk of gestational diabetes.

7. Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
Pregnant women having PCOS have more chances of developing gestational diabetes. It is seen that more than twice the percentage of pregnancies with diabetes is observed in women with PCOS. 

8. High glycosylated hemoglobin (Hba1c)
HBa1c is a blood test marker that reflects the glucose control of the last three months. Pregnant women with Hba1c greater than 5.7 % and abnormal oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) have an increased risk of diabetes. 

Keep the guesswork away and get yourself tested with Tata 1mg.
Book now

9. Previous history of GDM
Studies suggest that women who have a prior history of gestational diabetes are six times more prone to it in the next pregnancy. 

10. Family history
The history of diabetes in the first-line relatives of the women also makes the woman more prone to gestational diabetes. 

11. High-risk race or ethnicity 
Women that belong to particular races are more prone to gestational diabetes. These include African American, Hispanic or Latino, American Indian, Alaska Native, or Native Hawaiian.

12. History of delivery of infant >4000 gms
Women who have previously birthed an infant weighing 4000 grams or more have more chances of developing gestational diabetes in the next pregnancy. 

13. Season
Recent studies suggest that the chance of getting gestational diabetes is more in summer.

14.  In vitro fertilization (IVF)
There is a 50% increase in diabetes in pregnancy that results from in vitro fertilization (IVF), where the joining of a woman's egg and a man's sperm happens in a laboratory setting.

15. Other medical conditions
The presence of cardiovascular disease and hypertension in women is also a risk factor for diabetes during pregnancy. 
Diagnosis Of Gestational Diabetes

The diagnosis of gestational diabetes in all pregnant women is very essential since it is mostly asymptomatic. It is diagnosed with the help of the following: 

1. Screening 
There are two types of screening:

Universal screening: It involves screening of diabetes in all women between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. The screening in the third and fourth trimesters is essential because insulin resistance is well-established during this period. 

Selective screening: Selective screening is done only in the presence of the risk factors mentioned above. It is done in the first trimester. The high blood sugar level in this stage may indicate pre-existing type 1 or type 2 diabetes rather than gestational diabetes. 

2. Blood tests
There are two tests that are recommended to confirm gestational diabetes. These include:

Glucose challenge test: It is also known as a glucose screening test. It is the first test that is performed to diagnose gestational diabetes. In this, the blood glucose is analyzed after 1 hour of consuming glucose-rich liquid. 

Oral glucose tolerance test: In this, 75g of glucose is given in 100-200 ml of water after 8-12 hours of fasting. The blood glucose is measured at regular intervals – fasting, 1 hr, 2 hr, and 3 hr. High blood glucose at any two-time point confirms gestational diabetes. 


Getting your tests done has never been easier. Book your tests with TATA 1mg to get accurate results.
Click Here
Celebs affected
Celina Jaitly
Celina Jailty is an Indian actress. She was diagnosed with gestational diabetes and kept a strict watch on her diet to manage the condition.
Debina Bonnerjee
She is an Indian television actress. Recently, she gained popularity through her videos sharing her pregnancy and motherhood journey. She was diagnosed with gestational diabetes and managed her condition through dietary modifications.
Specialist To Visit

Gestational diabetes is managed by a team of doctors due to its multi-treatment approach. The speciality of doctors that can help include: 

General physician
Diabetologist: Help in the management of diabetes. 
Endocrinologist: Specialize in managing endocrine disorders. 

The panel should also include:

Nutritionist: Expert on the relationship between food and health
Neonatologist: Diagnose and treat health conditions of newborn
Obstetrician: Provide medical care during pregnancy, childbirth and postnatal care

If you suffer from any complications due to diabetes, then getting in touch with the respective specialist can help you to manage and prevent these problems. Some of the common specialists who can help are:

Nephrologists: Specialize in diagnosing and treating kidney conditions.
Neurologists: Diagnose and treat disorders that affect the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. 
Podiatrists: Help with problems that affect your feet or lower legs.
Dentists: Specialize in treating problems related to teeth. 
Ophthalmologists: Experts in treating problems related to the eyes. 

Consult India's best doctors online with a single click to get the right diagnosis and treatment.
Consult Now
Prevention Of Gestational Diabetes

Gestational diabetes is not completely preventable but some measures can lower the risk of the same. These include:

1. Go for pre-pregnancy counselling
It consists of a complete assessment of diabetes and associated complications to check the possibility of any medical condition during pregnancy. This will help to start the treatment plan even before pregnancy. 

2. Indulge in some physical activity 
It is seen that physically active women have 38% lesser chances of developing diabetes during pregnancy. Exercising 3 times a week has been shown to reduce the risk of gestational diabetes by 24% even in overweight individuals. 

Here are 9 exercise tips during pregnancy.
Click To Know!
3. Tweak diet
The risk of gestational diabetes can be reduced by dietary modifications, especially in overweight and obese women. However, it is important to make sure that the woman is getting nutrient-dense foods during pregnancy.

Are you a new mom-to-be?
Listen to our experts talk about what to eat and what not to eat during the first trimester.
Watch now

  3. Keep a check on your weight
Women who gain a lot of weight during pregnancy are more likely to develop gestational diabetes. Most of us think that putting on weight is very common during pregnancy. But there are some recommendations regarding weight gain: 

For women who were underweight before pregnancy (BMI of less than 18.5): 12.5 to 18 kilograms of weight gain during pregnancy.
For women with an average weight before pregnancy (BMI of between 18.5 and 24.9):11.5 to 16 kilograms of weight gain during pregnancy.
For women who were overweight before pregnancy (BMI of between 25 and 29.9): 7 to 11.5 kilograms of weight gain during pregnancy.
For women who were obese before pregnancy (BMI greater than 30): 5 to 9 kilograms of weight gain during pregnancy.

So, it is advisable to keep weight within this limit to reduce the risk of gestational diabetes. 
Keep a check on your weight with our widest range of weighing scales.
Shop now

Treatment Of Gestational Diabetes

Comprehensive care is very essential for the management of gestational diabetes. Diet and exercise are the pillars to manage it and medications are used in case of no response to these. The treatment includes:

1. Nutritional therapy

The management of gestational diabetes starts with modifications in the diet. The diet plan should be customized for each individual. It is highly advisable to consult a nutritionist. The meal should contain an appropriate amount of carbohydrate, fats, and proteins considering the health of the fetus. The eating plan created by the doctor/dietitian should always be followed which usually include:

Bedtime eating to prevent the development of ketosis overnight
5 Frequent meals– three small to moderate sized meals and 2-3 snacks to maintain optimum blood glucose level
Cultural preferences of the women to promote adherence
Proteins to avoid hunger

Foods to eat
Healthy fats from nuts, olive oil, fish oils, flax seeds, or avocados
Fruits and vegetables—ideally fresh, the more colorful the better; whole fruit rather than juices
High-fiber cereals and breads made from whole grains
High-quality proteins such as eggs, beans, low-fat dairy, and unsweetened yogurt

Foods to avoid
Trans fats or deep-fried foods
Packaged and fast foods, especially those high in sugar, baked goods, sweets, chips, desserts
White bread, sugary cereals, refined pastas 
Processed meat and red meat
Low-fat products that have replaced fat with added sugar, such as fat-free yogurt

2. Exercise
It plays a very important role in maintaining optimum blood glucose. The activities that can be included in the regimen are:
Walking
Swimming
Selected pilates
Low-intensity fitness exercises. 

Studies have shown that 20–30 min of activity 3–4 times a week has significantly reduced fasting and postprandial glucose. However, the exercise regimen should always be discussed with the doctor considering the safety of the baby. 

Here is a detailed video on the types of activities that can be safely performed during pregnancy.

3. Insulin
The injection of insulin is recommended when the individual is unable to achieve optimal glucose level even with diet and exercise. It is the first-line drug for gestational diabetes due to its safety and effectiveness. The dosage is based on the weight of the mother. 

The injection of insulin is self-administered by the patient. The insulin is usually taken in two halves – one half is taken at bedtime and the other half is divided between three meals. The injection is administered before meals to prevent the abrupt rise in glucose.

4. Metformin -  A new and safe prospect in managing gestational diabetes??
For several decades, insulin has been the most reliable treatment and the gold standard in the management of gestational diabetes. 
Metformin is an effective oral hypoglycemic drug and an established first-line treatment in type 2 diabetes currently. 

As it crosses the placenta, a safety issue remains an obstacle and, therefore, metformin is currently not recommended in the treatment of gestational diabetes. 

Nevertheless, recent research has supported metformin for its equivalent safety and efficacy compared to insulin along with the following reasons:
Ease of its use
Acceptability by the patients
Significantly less maternal weight gain
Less maternal hypoglycemia
Reduction in the complications associated with GDM such as preterm delivery, early pregnancy loss, and neonatal hypoglycemia.

Order your medicines from India’s largest online pharmacy for guaranteed delivery.
Add prescription

5. Management of labor
Gestational diabetes can impact the time and type of delivery. It is very important to manage blood glucose during labor to avoid maternal and fetal complications.

Routine glucose monitoring at least 4 times a day is essential to track glucose fluctuations. It includes daily monitoring of fasting glucose and 1 or 2 hours after each meal. The level of glucose after meals helps to assess maternal and fetal complications. 
The frequency of monitoring is less in women whose glucose is diet controlled.

Buy glucose monitors to keep track of your blood glucose levels in the comfort of your home.
Explore here

 Home-care For Gestational Diabetes


Along with exercise and diet, there are certain kitchen ingredients that have shown good results in the management of gestational diabetes:

Vitamin C rich foods: Studies have shown that consuming approximately 600 mg of Vitamin C helps in alleviating blood glucose. Women with gestational diabetes are advised to include Vitamin C-rich foods in their diet. Common examples of such food items that can be safely used during pregnancy are tomatoes, oranges, blueberries, strawberries, kiwis, and grapes. 

Indian gooseberry (Amla) is also a good source of Vitamin C that helps to control blood sugar levels. It makes the body more responsive to insulin. 

Is your diet not able to meet your bodily Vitamin C demand? Fill the gaps in your diet with Vitamin C supplements
Shop them here!
  Fenugreek (Methi): It is known to keep diabetes in check while improving glucose tolerance, lowering blood sugar levels, and stimulating the secretion of insulin. It is always available in the Indian kitchen and can be easily included in the daily diet. 

Drumstick (Moringa): It is rich in antioxidants and Vitamin C along with its anti-diabetic property. It can be consumed by sipping the water boiled with its pieces. It can also be added to the daal or curry. 

Cinnamon (Dalchini): It is known to control blood glucose levels due to the presence of a bioactive compound that regulates insulin activity. It can be taken with warm water. However, it should be taken in moderation as it can stimulate involuntary contractions during pregnancy. It is always better to consult your healthcare provider before starting it.
Complications Of Gestational Diabetes

The blood glucose usually returns to normal after the delivery of the baby. But, some women can develop type 2 diabetes later in their lives. The poor glucose control during pregnancy can lead to:

1. Spontaneous abortion 
The women who have persistently high blood glucose during pregnancy are at high risk of early miscarriage. 

2. Unexplained stillbirths
Miscarriages that happen after the 20th week of pregnancy are termed as stillbirths. Uncontrolled blood glucose over a long period of time can cause stillbirths. The excessive production of lactic acid as a result of diabetes can also cause fetal death. 

3. Preterm delivery
Gestational diabetes can cause preterm labor before 37 weeks of pregnancy. Babies born this early might suffer from long-term intellectual and developmental problems. 

4. Cesarean delivery
Diabetes in pregnancy increases the chances of cesarean delivery due to a large baby.

The other complications can be categorized as:
1. Maternal complications
Preeclampsia
Type 2 diabetes
Diabetic ketoacidosis (Formation of ketones bodies)
Severe hypoglycemia (Low blood sugar levels)
Diabetic nephropathy (Damage to the blood vessels of the kidneys)
Diabetic neuropathy (Nerve damage)
Diabetic retinopathy (Damage to the blood vessels of the eye).

2. Fetal complications

Macrosomia (Large fetus weighing about 4000 gms to 4500 gms). 
Hypoglycemia (Severe drop in blood glucose)
Polycythemia (High number of red blood cells)
Shoulder dystocia (failure to deliver the fetal shoulders during vaginal delivery)
Hyperbilirubinemia (High levels of bilirubin in the blood)
Respiratory distress (Difficulty in breathing)
Hypocalcemia (Low level of calcium)
Type 2 diabetes later in life
Alternative Therapies For Gestational diabetes

Some alternative therapies have shown promise in the management of gestational diabetes. However, it is crucial to consult the doctor before initiating any of them. 

1. Chinese herbal medicine
It includes several medicines that are prepared from plant products such as leaves, stems, flowers, roots, and seeds. Studies show that Chinese herbal medicines can be used in the management of gestational diabetes.

2. Yoga
Yoga plays a very important role in controlling blood sugar levels. It also keeps stress under control and helps in balancing the other vital parameters along with aiding in building strength, endurance capacity, and flexibility of the mother. 
Living With Gestational Diabetes

1. Postpartum Care for Diabetes
The management of diabetes after delivery depends upon its severity during pregnancy. GDM which is diagnosed in the third trimester usually resolves on its own after delivery. There is no need for immediate testing postpartum. However, a glucose tolerance test is advisable at 6 weeks postpartum to check recurrence.
Women with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes within 20 years of diagnosis. The yearly evaluation of diabetes is recommended in such women. The following tips can reduce the chances of occurrence of diabetes in the future:

Maintain a healthy weight
Stay active
Make healthy food choices
Breastfeed your baby. It gives the right nutrition to the baby and also helps the mother to control her weight.
  2. Neonatal care
A baby born to a diabetic mother has a higher chance of developing diabetes. Such neonates require a special care unit to monitor blood glucose at least for the first 48 hours. Early breastfeeding reduces the chances of developing diabetes both in the baby and the mother. 
Frequently Asked Questions
Will diabetes developed during pregnancy stay a lifetime?
Which week is highly critical for gestational diabetes?
Is gestational diabetes genetic?
Are there any ways to reduce the risk of gestational diabetes?
What should be done after delivery if the woman had gestational diabetes?
Will the child born to a mother with gestational diabetes be diabetic?
References
McIntyre HD, Kapur A, Divakar H, Hod M. Gestational diabetes mellitus—innovative approach to prediction, diagnosis, management, and prevention of future NCD—mother and offspring. Frontiers in endocrinology. 2020 Dec 3;11:614533.
Modzelewski R, Stefanowicz-Rutkowska MM, Matuszewski W, Bandurska-Stankiewicz EM. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus—Recent Literature Review. Journal of Clinical Medicine. 2022 Sep 28;11(19):5736.
Citation: Akhalya K, Sreelatha S, Rajeshwari, et al. A review article- gestational diabetes mellitus. Endocrinol Metab Int J. 2019;7(1):26-39.
Gestational Diabetes, Centers For Disease Control and Prevention, Last Updated On: 30 December, 2022.
Gestational Diabetes, American Diabetes Association
Gestational Diabetes, National Institute Of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, Last Updated: May 2017.
Quintanilla Rodriguez BS, Mahdy H. Gestational Diabetes. [Updated 2022 Sep 6]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023
Mirghani Dirar A, Doupis J. Gestational diabetes from A to Z. World J Diabetes. 2017 Dec 15;8(12):489-511. doi: 10.4239/wjd.v8.i12.489. PMID: 29290922; PMCID: PMC5740094.
Xu YXZ, Xi S, Qian X. Evaluating Traditional Chinese Medicine and Herbal Products for the Treatment of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. J Diabetes Res. 2019 Dec 3;2019:9182595. doi: 10.1155/2019/9182595. PMID: 31886289; PMCID: PMC6915007.
Breastfeeding after gestational diabetes, Gestational Diabetes UK< Last Updated On: 11 Nov 2016.
InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. What can help prevent gestational diabetes? [Updated 2020 Oct 22].
Wang CC, Li L, Shao YF, Liu XK, Tam WH, Li RM. Chinese herbal medicines for treating gestational diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Jun 24;2019(6):CD013354.
do Nascimento GR, Borges MDC, Figueiroa JN, Alves LV, Alves JG. Physical activity pattern in early pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus risk among low-income women: A prospective cross-sectional study. SAGE Open Med. 2019 Sep 9;7:2050312119875922


===============================================


