Hiccups
Also known as Hiccough and Singultus
Overview
  Almost every one of us must have experienced hiccups in our lifetime. 
  A hiccup is a repeated involuntary contraction of the diaphragm (the muscle that separates the chest from the abdomen) followed by a sudden closure of the vocal cords. This checks the inflow of air and produces the characteristic “snap” or “hic” sound.
  Eating or drinking too quickly, having very hot or freezing foods, spicy food, alcohol and carbonated beverages are common causes of getting hiccups. Babies also may get hiccups after feeding, crying or coughing. However, many times a reason for hiccups cannot be identified.
  Hiccups are usually harmless and settle by themselves in a few minutes. Breath-holding, drinking a glass of water or eating sugar are common ways to stop hiccups. 
  However, in some cases, prolonged hiccups that last for days or weeks may be suggestive of some underlying disorder. It is essential to identify the cause and treat it accordingly.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in men
Body part(s) involved
Diaphragm
Epiglottis
Nerves that supply the diaphragm
Mimicking Conditions
Coughing
Gagging
Necessary health tests/imaging
Laboratory tests: Serum electrolytes, Calcium test, Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) test, Creatinine test, Lipase test, Liver function tests
Imaging tests: ECG, Chest radiograph, CT and MRI.
        Treatment
     Acute hiccups: Self resolving
     Persistent and intractable hiccups:
Treatment of underlying disorder
Medications to calm the diaphragm
Invasive procedures
Specialists to consult
General physicians
Otolaryngologists
Gastroenterologists
Neurologists
Pulmonologists
Symptoms of Hiccups

The only symptom of hiccups is a slight tightening sensation in your chest, abdomen, or throat that causes the hiccup sound.
  The hiccup reflex involves the synchronized action of the
Diaphragm: It is a large muscle located below the lungs that demarcates the chest from the abdomen. It contracts rhythmically and continually to aid in respiration.
The muscles that open and close the windpipe
The nerves that act upon the diaphragm
  If any of the nerves involved in this cycle are triggered, for whatever reason, the diaphragm may contract involuntarily, allowing the air to be drawn into the lungs. As a result, epiglottis( the top of the windpipe) closes, resulting in the distinctive cough-like ‘hic’ hiccup sound.
Types of Hiccups

On the basis of the duration hiccups can be classified as:

Acute hiccups: Less than 48 hours duration
Persistent hiccups: Last over 2 days
Intractable hiccups: Last over a month
Causes of Hiccups

Common causes of acute hiccups:
  Eating too quickly or too much
Eating very hot or very cold foods
Consuming spicy food
Drinking alcohol and carbonated beverages
Swallowing air with chewing gum or sucking on candy
Indigestion
Bad odor
Inhaling toxic fumes
Cigarette smoking
Over-stretching the neck
Sudden temperature changes
Feeling nervous or excited

Causes of persistent and intractable hiccups:
1. Nerve damage or irritation
Conditions that may cause damage or irritation to the nerves that control the diaphragm including Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease(GERD), sore throat, goiter, tumor or cyst.
2. Medications
Certain medications can cause hiccups, such as- 
Antibiotics like azithromycin
Psychiatric medications like aripiprazole 
Anesthetic drugs like propofol 
Steroids
Certain epilepsy medications

3. Instrumentation
Certain procedures that require the use of instruments can mechanically irritate the nerves that control the diaphragm and induce hiccups. For eg. abdominal or chest surgery .
  4. Other medical conditions
Some of the conditions that may prompt frequent or prolonged attacks of hiccups include:

Oesophagitis (inflammation of the food pipe)
An overactive thyroid gland
Pleurisy (inflammation of the membrane surrounding the lungs)
Pneumonia (inflammation of the lungs)
Tuberculosis
Influenza (flu)
Pericarditis (inflammation of the tissue surrounding the heart)
Diabetes
Malaria
Hernia
Uremia (increased levels of waste products in blood)
Hypocalcemia (deficiency of calcium)
Chronic kidney failure
Multiple sclerosis
Stroke
Cancer

Causes of Hiccups in Infants

It is prevalent for babies under 12 months to get hiccups. Newborns and infants may experience hiccups more frequently during or after feeding as they may swallow food too quickly or overfeed. 

This can lead to stomach distension, and when the stomach distends, it pushes against the diaphragm, which causes it to contract and cause hiccups.

Hiccups can be a sign of an infant being full. Therefore, pediatricians typically recommend short feeds with burping breaks.

Your baby will usually stop hiccupping within 5 to 10 minutes, but if your baby's hiccups do not stop within a couple of hours, you should see your doctor.
  Note: Generally, hiccups are a sign of healthy growth and development.
Did you know ?
Babies often hiccup in the womb before they are born. In most cases, fetal hiccups are completely normal and not a cause for concern. They usually indicate that the baby’s respiratory and nervous systems are developing well, as are their reflexes.
Risk Factors For Hiccups
  Men are more prone to develop long-term hiccups as compared to women
Anxiety, stress and intense emotions
Patients who have received general anesthesia
Post-surgery, particularly abdominal surgery or chest surgery
Pregnancy
Did you know?
Beyond respiratory symptoms, persistent hiccups have been reported as a rare symptom of hospitalized COVID-19 patients. Learn more about COVID-19.
Click Here
Diagnosis of Hiccups

No specific test is required in the diagnosis of hiccups, but in the case of persistent or intractable hiccups, it is important to detect any probable underlying illness.
1. History
A physician may ask for the history of the current sickness that includes the length of the hiccups, any treatments used, and their relevance to a recent condition or operation. They may also ask about your past medical history, including information about known gastrointestinal and neurologic disorders, and drug history that also includes details concerning alcohol use.

2. Physical examination
During the physical exam, the doctor may perform a neurological exam to check your-
Balance and coordination
Muscle strength and tone
Reflexes
Sight and sense of touch

4. Laboratory testing
While no specific evaluation is required for acute hiccups, the following lab tests might be suggested for diagnosis of long term hiccups:
Serum electrolytes
Calcium test
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) test
Creatinine test
Lipase
Liver function tests

5. Imaging techniques
These  tests may help to identify abnormalities inside the chest, neurological changes or lesions causing hiccups.
ECG (Electrocardiogram)
Chest radiograph
Computerized tomography (CT)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
 Specialists To Visit

The majority of hiccup bouts are self-limiting and pass quickly. However, if they persist even after 2 days, it can be because of an underlying condition. Doctors that can help diagnose and treat hiccups include:

General physicians
Otolaryngologists
Gastroenterologists
Neurologists
Pulmonologists

An otorhinolaryngologist is a surgical doctor for the management of conditions of the head and neck.
A gastroenterologist is specialized in the diagnosis and treatment of the gastrointestinal tract disorders.
A neurologist specializes in the treatment of disorders affecting the brain, spinal cord, and nerves. A pulmonologist is a doctor who treats disorders of the lungs.

When to see a doctor?

Contact a doctor if the hiccups last for more than 48 hours, return frequently, or are interfering with your life. Consult them right away if you experience the following symptoms along with the hiccups:
Headache
Problems in balancing
All-over numbness
  If you are facing such an issue, consult a professional immediately. To book a consultation
Click Here

Prevention Of Hiccups
  Hiccups are very common and usually resolve on their own. Try these tips to prevent hiccups by making some changes in your habits:

Do’s:
Eating smaller meals
A cold water shower
Managing stress and anxiety effectively
Self-protection from sudden changes in temperature

Don'ts:
Eating too fast
Consuming spicy food
Drinking alcoholic, fizzy, or carbonated drinks
Eating or drinking something very cold immediately after something hot
Chewing gum 
Smoking
Over-stretching your neck
Inhaling toxic fumes
  Say goodbye to ‘hic’ or hiccups. Read about hiccups in a nutshell.
Click Here
Treatment of Hiccups


The doctor will want to know if your hiccups are caused by a medical condition or medication you are taking. If the underlying problem is treated or you switch medications, the hiccups should go away. The underlying cause determines the pharmacological treatment, which may include:
Medications based on specific causes:

1. For nasal symptoms: Nebulized 0.9% saline (2 mls over 5 minutes)

2. To reduce gastric irritation: Proton pump inhibitors can be given. They include: 
Omeprazole
Pantoprazole
Lansoprazole

3. To reduce gastric distension (enlargement): Medications include:
Metoclopramide
Domperidone
Itopride 


4. Antiflatulent: These medications are used to treat or prevent excessive intestinal gas. They include-
Simethicone
Peppermint water
Carminative agent 

Medications for Intractable Hiccups

1. Dopamine antagonists: These medicines can relax the diaphragm muscle or its 
 nerve supply and may stop persistent hiccups. They include:

Haloperidol
Olanzapine
Chlorpromazine
Methylphenidate


2. GABA agonist: Baclofen is the medication of choice as it helps relax muscles.

Note: Caution is advised in the elderly and patients with kidney dysfunction.

3. Local anesthetic: Low-dose of lignocaine infusion or nebulization help stop hiccups.

4. Antiepileptic: These help relax the nerve supply to the diaphragm and relieve hiccups. The most commonly used drugs include:

Gabapentin 
Sodium valproate


5. Calcium channel blocker: These blockers, such as nifedipine, can help control hiccups.

Invasive procedures 

More invasive options might be attempted only in case of extreme cases of hiccups. These include the following:
Nasogastric intubation: Insertion of a tube into the stomach via the nose.
Phrenic nerve block: The phrenic nerve which supplies the diaphragm can be blocked using anesthetic medication.
Diaphragmatic pacemaker: It is a battery-powered device that can be implanted surgically. It helps to stimulate or pace the nerves supplying to the diaphragm (the phrenic nerve or vagus nerve) and regulating breathing.
Did you know?
As per a study, rectal massage can also be helpful in relieving intractable hiccups. It can be done by inserting a finger into the rectum and massage using sterile gloves and sufficient lubricant. However, your doctor’s consent should be taken before trying this.
Home-care For Hiccups

Hiccups usually resolve on their own. However, if the hiccups don't stop, here are some tips that can help. Not many studies evaluate the effectiveness of these hiccup remedies. However, they are backed by anecdotal evidence. Additionally, some of the most common remedies stimulate your vagus or phrenic nerves, which are connected to your diaphragm.

Posture and breathing tips:
Pull your knees up to the chest and lean forward
Hold your breath for several seconds or longer
Breath out against closed mouth and nose
Breathe into a paper bag (do not put it over your head)

Pressure points tips:
Pull hard on the tongue
Put pressure on your diaphragm (the diaphragm separates your abdomen from your lungs)
Squeeze your nose closed while swallowing water.
Use your thumb to apply pressure to the palm of your other hand.
Give a gentle massage on your carotid artery on both sides of your neck.

Dietary tips:
Swallow a teaspoon of sugar
Slowly drink a glass of warm water without stopping to breathe.
Sip ice-cold water or gargle with ice water.
Bite on a lemon or taste vinegar.

Other tips:
Distract yourself with something engaging.
Tapping or rubbing the back of your neck.

Home- Care tips for hiccups in infants:
Here are some tips that can be helpful in toddler or infant hiccups.
Feeding tips:
Encourage your baby to burp as you switch from one breast to another or after feeding.
After each feeding, keep the baby upright for 20 to 30 minutes.
Resuming feeding can sometimes stop hiccups.
If your baby is bottle-fed, make sure to tip the bottle while feeding to limit the amount of air the baby swallows. 
You can also use anti-colic bottles, which do not allow air passage during feeding.

Explore our extensive range of anti-colic feeding bottles.
Click to shop


Other general tips:

Cold water can be given to the baby.
Teas containing fennel, chamomile or peppermint can be introduced into your infant's mouth using a dropper. It relieves the muscle spasms that cause hiccups.
Rubbing the baby's back.
Applying light downward pressure to the infant's upper stomach.
Tickling can distract your toddler's attention from their hiccups.

 It is always advisable to seek the child's pediatrician's consent before starting these tips.

What not to do:
Never startle or scare the baby.
Never try holding the baby's breath.


Complications of Hiccups

Frequent episodes of acute hiccups, persistent and intractable hiccups, can significantly impact the quality of life and cause physical pain, humiliation or psychological distress.The following complications are associated with them:
Dehydration
Malnutrition
Tiredness
Insomnia (lack of sleep)
Weight loss
Anxiety and depression
Delay the healing of a scar (wound) after recent abdominal surgery. This increases the likelihood of wound complications.
  Strong hiccups can also cause:
Reduced heart rate
Drop in blood pressure
The collapse of the lung due to air or gas in the space between the lungs and the chest wall
Alternative Therapies For Hiccups

Acupuncture
Acupuncture can be explored as an alternative treatment option for persistent and intractable hiccups. It stimulates the nerves that are responsible for hiccups. 

Some case studies show that acupuncture may effectively treat persistent hiccups, even when conventional forms of treatment don’t work. 
Although there is insufficient evidence evaluating the safety and effectiveness of acupuncture in resolving hiccups, some people have been able to cease their long-term hiccups with this therapy, so it may be worth a shot.

Massage
A carotid sinus massage may be suggested to manage chronic hiccups. This involves rubbing the main carotid artery in the neck by the healthcare provider.

Living With Hiccups

Hiccups are usually harmless and resolve themselves in a few minutes. Simple home remedies also come in handy to manage them.
  However, chronic or prolonged hiccups can be highly stressful, annoying and disrupt daily routines. They can make sleeping difficult or wake you up in the middle of the night. If the condition lasts for a long time, the lack of sleep can cause a loss of energy throughout the day, leading to exhaustion. All these factors can negatively impact a person's quality of life. 
  To cope with the condition, getting plenty of rest, eating and drinking small amounts regularly, and being aware of potential complications are critical.
   Take prescribed medications on time. Keep yourself busy and distracted. Develop a hobby. Join support groups facing the same challenges.
  Maintain regular contact with your doctor throughout treatment to avoid the recurrence of hiccups and complications associated with chronic hiccups.
Did you know?
An interesting case report suggested that a 40-year-old man’s 4 days of continuous hiccuping ceased immediately following sexual intercourse. 
Celebs affected
Jennifer Lawrence
Actress Jennifer Lawrence once shared her bizarre hiccup cure. She said, “The only thing that ever works for getting rid of hiccups for me is when I drink water and raise my arms over my head and lower them very slowly.”
Frequently Asked Questions
Are hiccups common in newborn babies?
Can stress cause hiccups?
Will holding my breath cure hiccups?
Can honey stop hiccups?
How long do hiccups last?
References
Giannos P, Katsikas Triantafyllidis K, Geropoulos G, Kechagias KS. Persistent hiccups as an atypical presentation of SARS-COV-2 infection: A systematic review of case reports [Internet]. Frontiers in neurology. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2022 [cited 2022Dec14].
Hiccups in neurocritical care - e-jnc.org [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec14].
Gotfried J. Hiccups - gastrointestinal disorders [Internet]. MSD Manual Professional Edition. MSD Manuals; 2022 [cited 2022Dec14].
Harris J, Smith T, Preis J. Intractable hiccups due to herpetic esophagitis in an immunocompromised patient. IDCases. 2016 Feb 24;4:34-7. doi: 10.1016/j.idcr.2016.01.001.
(PDF) hiccup: Mystery, nature and treatment - researchgate [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec14].
Hiccups, chronic [Internet]. NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders). [cited 2022Dec14].
Viera AJ, Sullivan SA. Remedies for prolonged hiccups [Internet]. American Family Physician. 2001 [cited 2022Dec14].
Hiccups in neurocritical care - e-jnc.org [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec14].
NHS choices. NHS; [cited 2022Dec14].
Chang F-Y, Lu C-L. Hiccup: Mystery, nature and treatment [Internet]. Journal of neurogastroenterology and motility. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2012 [cited 2022Dec14].
NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec14].
Hiccup: Mystery, nature and treatment [Internet]. Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility. Korean Society of Neurogastroenterology and Motility; 2012 [cited 2022Dec14].
Hiccups NCG guidelines - tata memorial center [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec14].
Peleg R, Peleg A. Case report: Sexual intercourse as potential treatment for intractable hiccups [Internet]. Canadian family physician Medecin de famille canadien. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2000 [cited 2023Jan23].
A; OMBHO. Termination of intractable hiccups with digital rectal massage [Internet]. Journal of internal medicine. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2023Jan23].


===============================================


