Sjogren’s Syndrome
Also known as Sicca syndrome, Mikulicz's disease, Dacryosialoadenopathia atrophicans, Gougerot-Houwer-Sjogren syndrome, Gougerot-Sjogren syndrome, Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, Keratoconjunctivitis sicca-xerostomia, Secreto-inhibitor-xerodermostenosis and Sjogren-Gougerot syndrome
Overview
Sjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disorder that decreases the amount of moisture produced by the eyes and saliva by salivary glands. It is named after Swedish eye doctor Henrik Sjogren, who first described the condition. 

The condition is more common in women and most people who are diagnosed are over the age of 40, but it can develop at any age. Sjogren's syndrome is often associated with other immune system disorders like rheumatoid arthritis and lupus (an autoimmune condition causing inflammation of joints, skin, kidneys, blood cells, brain, heart, and lungs). This syndrome is identified by its two most common symptoms namely dry eyes and dry mouth (also called xerostomia).

Some individuals may be first diagnosed with a rheumatic disorder (such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus) and can later develop the dry eyes and dry mouth (characteristic of Sjogren's syndrome). In general, almost half the people with Sjogren syndrome also have another autoimmune disorder.

The treatment mostly focuses on relieving the symptoms and complications due to dry eyes, dry mouth, and other other symptoms.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Individuals above 40 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Most common: Mouth and eyes
Less common: Lungs, kidneys, liver, lymph nodes, and nerves
Prevalence
Worldwide: 0.01-3% (2017)
Mimicking Conditions
Immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing disease
Necessary health tests/imaging
Schirmer test
Cornea and conjunctiva examination
Salivary analysis
Biopsy of minor salivary gland
Additional tests
Complete blood count (CBC)
Chemistry panel 
Chest radiography
Protein electrophoresis 
Antinuclear antibodies test 
Antibodies against Ro/SSA and La/SSB autoantigens 
Rheumatoid factor 
Viral testing: Hepatitis C virus & Human T-lymphotropic virus 1
Antibody against thyroid antigens
Thyroid function 
Treatment
Dry eyes and eye inflammation: Artificial tears, Eye gel, Eye drops & Punctal occlusion
Dry mouth and its related symptoms: Pilocarpine & Cevimeline
Other symptoms: Ibuprofen, Prednisone, Hydroxychloroquine, Immunosuppressants & Antifungals
See All
Symptoms Of Sjogren’s Syndrome

Sjogren’s syndrome can affect the whole body and can cause inflammation of organs like the kidneys or lungs. The symptoms of Sjogren's syndrome include:
Dryness of the eyes, mouth, and skin
Dryness of the vagina
Tiredness/fatigue
Pain in the muscles and joints
Swelling of the salivary glands
Rashes on the skin, especially after sun exposure
Dry nasal passages and throat along with a dry cough
Acid reflux
Swelling of the glands around the face and neck
Trouble sleeping
Poor concentration and memory problems
Numbness, tingling, and weakness, especially in the extremities
Shortness of breath or trouble breathing
Muscle weakness
Note: The reason for dryness of the mouth (also called xerostomia) can be due to several other causes and not just Sjogren’s syndrome.
Read More!


Types Of Sjogren's Syndrome

Sjogren’s syndrome is classified into two forms, namely:

1. Primary form: In this type, the syndrome is not associated with any type of rheumatic disease. This form develops as a result of any other health condition.

2. Secondary form: This form is associated with other rheumatic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma (hardening and tightening of the skin), polymyositis (muscle weakness affecting both sides of the body), or psoriatic arthritis (arthritis associated with psoriasis - red patches of skin topped with silvery scales).
Causes Of Sjogren's Syndrome

Sjogren’s syndrome is mostly thought to be an autoimmune disease, in which the immune system attacks the healthy cells instead of the diseased ones as a result of some triggers. In this syndrome, the immune system attacks the ophthalmic glands in the eyes and salivary glands in the mouth.

Though the exact cause of the syndrome is still unclear, Sjogren's syndrome is thought to be a result of a combination of genetic and environmental factors. According to several researchers, many genes affect the risk of developing Sjogren's syndrome, but that development of the condition may be triggered by something in the environment as well.

In particular, viral or bacterial infections can activate the immune system, and cause the development of Sjogren's syndrome in susceptible individuals.
Risk Factors For Sjogren's Syndrome

Though the explicit cause of this syndrome is still not clear, several kinds of research suggest the abnormal functioning of the immune system causing damage to the healthy cells and tissues. There can be several factors playing a prominent role in it like the environmental and genetic factors. An individual developing Sjogren's syndrome has most likely inherited the risk from one or both of their parents, along with certain environmental impacts like a viral or bacterial infection.

Some of the common traits most commonly in people that act as risk are:

1. Age: Generally seen in individuals over the age of 40, but it can affect younger individuals, including children.

2. Gender: Several types of research have been done to understand the gender predilection of Sjogren's syndrome. Women are 10 times more likely to develop this disease than men and it may be due to the effect of sex hormones on a woman’s immune system.

The role of the hormone estrogen that drops after menopause is said to be the major risk factor in the development of this disease in women. 

3. Rheumatic disease: The risk of developing Sjogren's syndrome is more in individuals who already have a rheumatic condition such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, polymyositis, or psoriatic arthritis.

About half of all individuals with Sjogren's syndrome have been diagnosed with another autoimmune disorder.

4. Genes: Scientists are beginning to identify the genes that can be related to Sjogren's syndrome by analyzing large samples of DNA from the patients suffering from the disease. There are several different genes that have been identified which can increase the risk of developing Sjogren's syndrome.
Did you know?
Rheumatoid arthritis can affect the quality of life and it is different from osteoarthritis. Read to know more myths and facts about rheumatoid arthritis.
Read Now!
Diagnosis Of Sjogren’s Syndrome

The major manifestation of Sjogren's syndrome is oral and ocular (eye) dryness. In clinical practice, patients who present with these symptoms should be assessed for it with the following tests:

1. Schirmer test
It is done to estimate the functioning of the lacrimal glands to measure the production of tears. A wetting paper strip of ≤ 5 mm is placed under the lower lid for 5 mins, after which the paper is removed and checked for its moisture content. 

2. Cornea and conjunctiva examination
This test is done to check for any punctuate or filamentary keratitis lesions, which is a typical feature of keratoconjunctivitis sicca. It is done using a rose bengal or lissamine green stain.

3. Salivary analysis
It is done to estimate the production of saliva from an unstimulated salivary gland. The value is considered normal if there is > 1.5 ml in 15 minutes.

4. Biopsy of minor salivary gland
This is done to assess the presence of lymphocytic infiltrates around salivary gland epithelium which is a hallmark of Sjogren's syndrome.

5. Past medical history
If the patient has any pre-existing autoimmune disease, along with dry eyes and dry mouth, it can be concluded that the patient has developed secondary Sjogren’s syndrome.

Along with these, other investigations that may be done include:
Complete blood count (CBC): It is a group of tests done to get information regarding the blood cells like red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets.
Chemistry panel: They help evaluate the body's electrolyte balance and the status of several major body organs.
Chest radiography: Chest x-ray uses a very small dose of ionizing radiation to produce pictures of the inside of the chest.
Protein electrophoresis: Protein electrophoresis is a test to measure specific proteins in the blood. 
Antinuclear antibodies test: This test looks for antinuclear antibodies in the blood to detect any autoimmune disorder. 
Antibodies against Ro/SSA and La/SSB autoantigens: This test is done to detect autoantibodies directed against Ro/SSA and La/SSB autoantigens generally indicative of patients with Sjogren's syndrome. 
Rheumatoid factor: Rheumatoid factors are proteins and high levels of it in the blood are most often associated with autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome.
Viral testing for:
Hepatitis C virus can cause liver inflammation, sometimes leading to serious liver damage.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a virus that attacks the body's immune system leading to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Human T-lymphotropic virus 1 was the first oncogenic human retrovirus to be discovered causing adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma and HTLV-1-associated myelopathy or tropical spastic paraparesis (a progressive nervous system condition).
Antibod against thyroid antigens:These antibodies play a key role in the diagnosis of autoimmune disorders.
Thyroid function: Thyroid function is a group of tests that are done together to detect or diagnose thyroid disease and consist of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroxine (T4), and triiodothyronine (T3). 
Once the diagnosis is established, additional investigational tests like cryoglobulins, complement levels, and immunofixation can be done in patients with peripheral purpura, peripheral neuropathy, salivary gland enlargement or in situ demonstration of salivary gland lymphoma.  Along with these, upper endoscopies, bone marrow biopsy, and computed tomography scans of the neck, thorax, and abdomen should be performed to detect any potential development of lymphoma.
Did you know?
Sjogren's patients are at a higher risk of developing blood cancers like non-Hodgkin B cell lymphoma, hence they should be monitored closely. Know more about blood cancer.
Click To Read!
Prevention Of Sjogren’s Syndrome

Since the actual cause for any autoimmune condition is still unknown, it is difficult to prevent it.  Although Sjogren’s syndrome can be prevented to some extent by monitoring the risk factors and consulting the doctor to understand, if the patient is suffering from any other rheumatic condition like:
Lupus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Scleroderma
Polymyositis
Psoriatic arthritis
Celebs affected
Venus Williams
After winning her first round in the U.S. Open tennis tournament she withdrew from play and announced that she had Sjogren's syndrome. "I had issues with Sjogren's for a while, it just wasn’t diagnosed,” Williams said. She now has become an activist for the disease.
Carrie Ann Inaba
Carrie Ann Inaba is a well-known judge on ABC's competition show "Dancing with the Stars" was diagnosed with Sjogren's syndrome. As an awareness ambassador for the Sjogren's syndrome foundation, she spreads hope and comfort to others with the condition.
Specialist To Visit

Sjogren’s syndrome comes with a varied amount of symptoms. These doctors diagnose and manage oral symptoms like dryness of the mouth, dental caries, periodontal disorders, eye diseases and any other rheumatic diseases that are related to the syndrome. They are:
Dentist
General physician
Ophthalmologist
Rheumatologist
If you are facing such an issue, seek advice from our professionals. 
Consult Now!


Treatment Of Sjogren’s Syndrome

Once the diagnosis is done, the doctors will develop a comprehensive treatment plan that will depend on the extent and severity of the symptoms. Most symptoms can be treated with over-the-counter products whereas some may require prescription medications or minor surgical procedures.

While some individuals may only experience dry eyes and dry mouth, there will be systemic symptoms such as difficulty in concentrating, memory lapses, fatigue, and joint pain. In some cases, the disease can also affect the blood vessels and internal organs like the lungs and the kidneys. The treatment for various symptoms is discussed below:

Dry eyes and eye inflammation 

Dry eyes are the most common symptoms of this syndrome. Mild to moderate cases are managed by the following:
Use of artificial tears during the day and a gel at night. 
Hot compresses and eyelid cleansers along with gentle eyelid massage to relieve blocked oil glands in the eyelids, in case of blepharitis (eyelid inflammation).
Eye drops prescribed by an ophthalmologist.
In certain severe cases of dry eyes, the doctor might suggest a minor surgical procedure called punctal occlusion. This procedure consists of the insertion of tiny plugs into the tear duct by the ophthalmologist to block them. It is done to sustain tears in the eyes longer, which will help keep them moist.

Dry mouth and its related symptoms 

There are a lot of over-the-counter options that are available to relieve the symptoms of dry mouth. They are: 
Sugarless candy 
Sugar-free gum 
Artificial saliva products such as a spray or lozenge
If this does not help, the patient may consult a dentist or a general physician to get prescribed medications like: 
Pilocarpine: Pilocarpine stimulates certain nerves and glands in the body thereby increasing the production of saliva, tears, sweat, digestive juices, and other secretions.
Cevimeline: Cevimeline also helps to increase the secretions of the exocrine glands. 
Other symptoms 

Individuals with Sjogren’s syndrome often experience joint pain due to rheumatic disorders. They may require medications such as:
Ibuprofen (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs)
Prednisone (low-dose steroids) 
Hydroxychloroquine (disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug )
Immunosuppressants
Antifungals
What if your eyes do not produce enough moisture?
Every time you blink, your eyes get washed by tears that contain water, oil, and mucus. It keeps your eyes moisturized and lubricated. Know more about the management of dry eyes.
Click To Read!
Home-care For Sjogren’s Syndrome

Sjogren’s syndrome may lead to a variety of symptoms that can affect the general well-being, but most of the symptoms are manageable with simple home care measures or lifestyle changes.

Tips to protect eyes and relieve the symptoms
Dryness of the eyes is a very common symptom of Sjogren’s syndrome. The patient affected with it often feels a burning sensation or like there is something in the eyes. Here are a few options to help reduce tear evaporation by protecting the eyes from wind, air, and airborne particles.
Wear wraparound sunglasses or goggles
Add shields to the sides of their glasses
Avoid windy, dry, or smoky places
Reduce reading, watching TV, or looking at screens for a long time
Tips for dryness of the mouth
Dry mouth is another most common symptom of this syndrome, which can increase your risk of cavities. It can also make it more difficult to speak or swallow. Some of the tips to help relieve the symptoms are:
Chew sugar-free gum
Try sucking on candies 
Keep sipping water during the day
Use artificial saliva products such as a spray or lozenge
Quit smoking
Avoid caffeine
Limit alcohol use
Decrease the sugar intake
Take over-the-counter saliva substitutes or oral lubricants 
Maintain good oral hygiene by:
Always brushing and flossing after every meal or snack.
Consulting a dentist at least twice a year.
Using fluoride toothpaste, a fluoride rinse, or getting a professional fluoride treatment after a dental cleaning.
Individuals with Sjogren’s syndrome are at a higher risk of contracting fungal infections of the mouth; they can be treated with antifungal medications or medicated troches that slowly dissolve in the mouth. 
If the patient wears oral dentures, it has to be made sure dentures are disinfected every night.
Tips for other symptoms
Sjogren’s syndrome can have an effect on the whole body. Some individuals have vaginal dryness, dryness of the lips, fatigue, rashes on the skin, or joint pain. Sjogren’s syndrome can also cause inflammation of other organs like the kidneys or lungs. Some of the measures that can help in aiding against these symptoms are:
For dry lips: Use petroleum jelly and lip balms every 2 hours.
For vaginal dryness: This is seen in women after menopause. Products like vaginal moisturizers, estrogen cream, Vitamin E oil, hyaluronic acid suppositories, and vaginal lubricants can be helpful. Applying sufficient artificial lubrication to both partners during intercourse can help prevent the pain.
For dry skin: This can be managed easily by using body lotions regularly and throughout the day, especially after baths or showers.
For blocked nasal passages or dry nose: Try saline nasal sprays and treat any other causes of congestion such as allergies and sinus infections, before they worsen.
For acid reflux: This generally happens due to a lack of saliva that helps reduce the acidity of the stomach. It can be managed with dietary modifications and non-prescription medications.
Complications Of Sjogren’s Syndrome

The most common complication of Sjogren's syndrome is the involvement of the eyes and mouth. Here are some of the common complications of the syndrome:
Dental cavities
Dry mouth
Yeast infections
Gum diseases
Vision problems
Corneal damage due to dry eyes
Light sensitivity
Blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids)
Some of the less common complications that might affect the other parts of the body like lungs, liver, kidney, lymph nodes, or nerves are:
Pneumonia 
Bronchitis
Kidney disorders
Hepatitis 
Liver cirrhosis
Lymphoma
Peripheral neuropathy (numbness, tingling, and burning in your hands and feet)
Inflammation in lung, kidney and liver
Vasculitis (an inflammation of the blood vessels)
Lymph node swelling
Interstitial lung disease
Cystic lung disease
MALT lymphoma (belongs to a group of non-Hodgkin lymphomas called marginal zone lymphomas)
Loss of pregnancy
Neonatal lupus syndrome
Parotid tumors
Alternative Therapies For Sjogren’s Syndrome

The basic management of Sjogren’s syndrome involves lifestyle modification and use of alternatives to relieve the common symptoms like dry eyes and dry mouth. Along with home remedies and self-care, there are a few options in alternative medicine that can provide relief. They are as follows:

1. Chinese herbal medicine
Studies have analyzed chinese herbal medicine (CHM) for the treatment of primary Sjogren’s syndrome (PSS). These studies suggest that CHM can be given either as a sole treatment or in conjunction with conventional therapy to improve lacrimal and salivary gland function. This option is considerably safe and further research has been going on to determine the exact efficacy of this therapy.

2. Herbs and supplements
The fundamental aim of this therapy is to “calm” the immune system and prevent it from causing further damage. Some of the herbs and supplements that can help alleviate the symptoms of Sjogren’s syndrome include:
Cysteine
Evening primrose oil
Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA)
Omega-6 fatty acids
Sulphur
3. Diet
There is no special diet for Sjogren’s syndrome unless the doctor suggests something specific. There are a few things that can be added and avoided to manage the symptoms. They are:
Avoid alcohol, spicy or acidic food items that may cause irritation in the mouth
Use sugar-free lozenges (xylitol) to help keep the mouth moist
Add sauces, olive oil, or dressings to lubricate food
Consume water or any drink alongside the food
Use a drinking straw to make swallowing easier
Add cucumber to diet to increase fluid intake
The best option is to follow a balanced diet which contains fresh fruit and vegetables and has levels of fats and sugar. Some foods like artificial sweeteners are believed to trigger an inflammatory reaction so they must be avoided.
Living With Sjogren’s Syndrome

Proper management of Sjogren’s syndrome helps to alleviate symptoms and also prevent complications. People with this syndrome can live full lives with proper self-care and the care of knowledgeable healthcare professionals. Here are a few things that can help in the management of the symptoms:
Monitor any development of severe complications, like lymphoma, vasculitis, and pulmonary, kidney, and liver disease
Lookout for any kind of pain or redness in the eyes and get it evaluated promptly, as this may signal an infection or corneal damage
Follow proper protocols for dry mouth such as regular use of fluoride and maintenance of oral hygiene
Get dental care at regular intervals to reduce the risk of cavities and other dental problems
Visit the physician regularly for general health screening and to know about preventative medicine
Pay close attention to any abnormal or persistent swelling in the glands around the face or neck, under the arms, or in the groin areas, as that might be a signal for lymphoma
Use moisturizing products to tackle the dryness of the skin and vagina
Give importance to diet and exercise for general well-being
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the prognosis of people living with Sjogren’s syndrome?
Is weight gain associated with Sjogren’s syndrome?
Does Sjogren’s syndrome affect ears?
Is there any relation between hair loss and Sjogren’s syndrome?
When to see a doctor?
References
Overview of Sjogren’s Syndrome. Sjogren's Syndrome. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. 2021 Jan.
Overview. Sjogren's syndrome. NHS. 2020 Apr.
Who’s at Highest Risk of Developing Sjogren's Syndrome? Sjogren's Syndrome Risk Factors. Johns Hopkins Medicine.
Mavragani CP, Moutsopoulos HM. Sjogren syndrome. CMAJ. 2014 Oct 21;186(15):E579-86. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.122037. Epub 2014 Feb 24. PMID: 24566651; PMCID: PMC4203623.
Fast Facts. Sjogren's Syndrome. American College of Rheumatology.
Luo H, Li X, Liu J, Andrew F, George L. Chinese Herbal Medicine in Treating Primary Sjogren's Syndrome: A Systematic Review of Randomized Trials. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:640658. doi: 10.1155/2012/640658. Epub 2012 Aug 27.
Maciel G, Crowson CS, Matteson EL, Cornec D. Prevalence of Primary Sjogren's Syndrome in a US Population-Based Cohort. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2017 Oct;69(10):1612-1616. doi: 10.1002/acr.23173. Epub 2017 Aug 31.
Hilary C McCrary , Erynne A Faucett , Audrey B Erman. Immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing disease Mimicking sjogren's syndrome: A case report. Epub 2016 Jun.


===============================================


