Diphtheria
Also known as Strangling angel of children
Overview
Diphtheria is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae. It is highly contagious and can spread through droplet transmission such as during breathing, coughing, speaking, and even laughing.

The disease is most often associated with a sore throat, fever, and the development of an adherent membrane known as pseudomembrane on the throat. The bacteria also produces exotoxins that can damage the heart, lungs, kidney, and nerves. 

Diphtheria was a very common cause of death in children and adolescents in the 1920s. Proper vaccination that starts from infancy has reduced the number of cases to a larger extent.

The main risk factors for developing diphtheria are not being immunized against the disease and other factors like crowding, weak immunity, and direct or indirect contact with an infected individual.

Diagnosis is made by the patient's history and physical examination. Culture of Corynebacterium from the patient yields a definitive diagnosis although the patient should be treated if diphtheria is even suspected. The treatment of diphtheria includes early administration of antibiotics and diphtheria antitoxin. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups but more common in children below 12 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Mouth
Nose
Tonsils
Larynx
Pharynx
Throat
Skin
Heart
Nervous system
Prevalence
Worldwide: 8819 (2017)
India: 3485 (2020)
Mimicking Conditions
Epiglottitis
Retropharyngeal Abscess
Angioedema
Infectious mononucleosis
Pharyngitis
Oral candidiasis
Necessary health tests/imaging
Physical examination & medical history
Culture test
Toxin testing: Elek test, PCR testing & Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
Blood tests: Complete blood count (CBC),  Troponin & Diphtheria antitoxoid antibody
Imaging tests: Chest X-ray, neck X ray & Electrocardiography (ECG)
Treatment
Diphtheria antitoxin
Antibiotic:  Erythromycin and Penicillin G, Linezolid & Vancomycin 
See All
Symptoms Of Diphtheria
 
The symptoms of diphtheria depend upon the part of the body affected by the bacteria. It usually infects the respiratory tract and skin involving tonsils, throat, nose, and/or skin. The signs and symptoms can be mild or severe. The incubation period is generally 2 to 5 days. Even asymptomatic patients,  if not treated with antibiotics, can pass the infection to another person for up to 4 weeks. 

The bacteria attaches to the lining of the respiratory tract and cause symptoms such as: 
Weakness
Sore throat
Runny nose
Hoarseness
Chills
Painful swallowing
Low grade fever (about 100.4 to 102° F)
Generally feeling unwell (malaise)
Swollen lymph nodes in the neck
Cervical lymphadenopathy (enlargement of lymph nodes in the head and neck)
Swelling of the palate (roof of the mouth)
Loss of appetite
Tiredness/fatigue

In children, symptoms may also include:
Rapid heart rate
Nausea
Vomiting
Headache

The bacteria can also affect skin (cutaneous/skin diphtheria) and cause symptoms such as open sores and ulcers. These sores appear on the arms and legs, sometimes resemble other skin conditions such as eczema, psoriasis, and impetigo. The bacteria can also cause painful, red and swollen lesions on the skin. 
Formation of pseudomembrane
The diphtheria bacteria makes a thick and gray coating in the respiratory system near tonsils or other parts of the throat which is called pseudomembrane. The pseudomembrane may narrow and block the airway. It can also paralyze the roof of the mouth. All these manifestations can be experienced in the following symptoms: 
Difficulty in breathing
Difficult in swallowing 
Gasping sound while inhaling

In severe cases the toxin produced by the bacteria can damage nerves of the face, throat, arms, and legs and cause:
Sudden Movements of the eyes, arms and legs
Respiratory failure
Rapid heart rate
Irregular heart rhythm
Low blood pressure
Myocarditis 
Heart failure
Causes Of Diphtheria
 
Diphtheria is caused by a bacteria known as Corynebacterium diphtheria which can enter the body through nose, mouth or broken skin. The bacteria produces a toxin that can travel via the bloodstream and lymph vessels. This toxin can damage the heart, kidney, and nervous system. 
Transmission
It is a highly contagious disease and can spread through close contact with the discharge from an infected person's eyes, nose, throat or skin. It can transmit through: 
Coughing, sneezing, or speaking via respiratory droplets
Touching infected sores or ulcers
Touching contaminated clothes or objects through a break in the skin 
Did you know?
Respiratory infections can also spread through frequently touched surfaces. This mode of transmission of infection is called indirect contact transmission and the surfaces are known as fomites. Read in detail how respiratory infections spread through surfaces.
Tap To Read!
Types Of Diphtheria

There are several types of diphtheria according to the part of the body affected. It can be categorized as: 
Respiratory diphtheria
In this, the bacteria affects the part of the respiratory tract that includes the nose, larynx, and tonsils. It is of following types: 

Nasal diphtheria: In this, the pseudomembrane formed by the bacteria appears inside the nostrils. This form is not dangerous as almost no toxins are absorbed from this location. The chances of systemic complications are also rare in nasal diphtheria. 

Faucial diphtheria: It is the most common form of diphtheria in which the effect of the toxin is generally limited to the tonsils. People generally recovered well from this form with early treatment.

Nasopharyngeal: As the name suggests, here infection spreads to nose and pharynx. It is the most fatal form of diphtheria as infection can spread to blood. This can lead to septicemia which refers to blood poisoning. 

Laryngeal diphtheria: This form of diphtheria can block the airway as infection spreads downward from the nasopharynx to the larynx. 
Cutaneous diphtheria
In this, the skin is affected by the bacteria which can cause symptoms like open sores, lesions and ulcers on the skin. 
Risk Factors For Diphtheria
  Diphtheria is a vaccine preventable disease. The complete vaccination provides a good way to prevent diphtheria and decreases the chances of developing it even in the presence of risk factors. The risk of getting diphtheria are high if you: 
Are not vaccinated 
Are inadequately vaccinated
Are living in temperate region
Are exposed to cold environments 
Are a frequent traveler in the diphtheria contaminated zone
Are in close contact with an infected person
Have weak immune system
Live in unhygienic and crowded condition
Travel to particular areas that are known for diphtheria such as South-East Asia, Russia and surrounding countries, Baltic countries and Eastern European countries.

Diphtheria is common in children, however older people with some comorbidities are also at higher risk of developing diphtheria. People with low socioeconomic status also have higher chances of getting this infection. 
Diagnosis Of Diphtheria
  Physical examination and medical history
Doctors generally decide if the patient has diphtheria by analyzing the symptoms and discussing the medical history including vaccination status and travel history. The throat is specifically examined for gray or green membrane which is a characteristic of diphtheria. The doctor also asks if the patient has come in contact with someone who has had diphtheria. 
Culture
The diagnosis is confirmed by taking a sample and sending it to a laboratory for testing the growth of bacteria. The samples are taken by swabbing the throat and wound in case of skin infection. This procedure takes time so the treatment is usually started after physical examination. 
Toxin testing
The test detects the toxin produced by the bacteria. It helps in the differentiation of toxigenic strain from non-toxigenic variants. This is done through: 
Elek test
PCR testing
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
Blood tests
Complete blood count: It helps to find out the level of infection by assessing several blood parameters. 



Understand in detail about complete blood count.
Read To Know!

Troponin I: It is a marker of cardiac (heart) injury. This helps in finding out the extent of the damage to the heart. 

Diphtheria antitoxoid antibody: This test measures the level of antibodies in the blood. The antibodies can be produced either through vaccination or previous infection. 
Imaging studies
Chest and neck x-ray: These imaging tests are used to detect swelling of the soft tissue structure around the pharynx, epiglottis, and chest.

Electrocardiography (ECG): ECG is done in case of suspected heart disorders.
Celebs affected
George Washington
George Washington, who served as the 1st president of the United States was diagnosed with diphtheria at the age of 15 years. He was successfully treated with early medical intervention.
Specialist To Visit

Diphtheria demands immediate medical attention because any delay in treatment can lead to systemic complications.  So, it is very necessary to consult the doctor as early as possible to get the best effective treatment and to avoid complications. 

You may consult doctors from these specialties such as:
General physician
ENT specialist
Infectious disease specialist 
Pulmonoligist

In case of heart complications, consult a cardiologist. You may consult a pediatrician in case your child is facing any such issues. 

Consult India’s best doctors online from a single click.
Consult Now!

Prevention Of Diphtheria
Vaccination
Diphtheria is a vaccine preventable disease. Before the introduction of the diphtheria vaccine, it was one of the leading causes of hospitalization and death especially in infants and children. Getting adequately vaccinated is the best way to prevent diphtheria. The vaccination also reduces the chances of community spread. 

Types of diphtheria vaccines
DTaP vaccine is for young children & provides protection from diphtheria, tetanus, and whooping cough
DT vaccine protects young children from diphtheria and tetanus
Tdap vaccine is for preteens, teens, and adults & provides protection from tetanus, diphtheria, and whooping cough
Td vaccine protects preteens, teens, and adults from tetanus and diphtheria

Things to consider before vaccination
It is always advisable to tell your doctor if you: 
are unwell on the day of vaccination
have had a serious reaction to any vaccine in the past
have had a severe allergy to anything
are pregnant

Who should get vaccinated?

Babies and children: Babies and younger children need 3 and 2 shots of DTaP vaccine respectively to get the high protection against diphtheria, tetanus, and whooping cough (pertussis). These shots are given at the following ages: 
2 months
4 months
6 months
15 to 18 months
4 to 6 years

Pregnant women: TdaP vaccine is administered in the third trimester of every pregnancy, as part of the combination vaccine for diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough. This provides protection to the baby for the initial few months.

Read in detail about the benefits of Tdap vaccination in pregnancy. 
Read in detail!


Preteens and teens: One shot of TdaP is given to the children between the age of 11 to 12 years to boost their immunity.

Adults: Tdap can be given at any age to the adults, if the person has not received it in the past. The shot is followed by either a Td or Tdap every 10 years.

Most people think that vaccines are for adults. However, what many people are unaware of is the fact that an adult also needs to be vaccinated for several diseases. 
Understand what are the other vaccines needed for adults. 
Read Now!

The vaccine is also advised for: 
People who are traveling overseas, who haven’t had a diphtheria vaccine in the past 10 years
Laboratory workers who might have contact with the bacteria that causes diphtheria.

Who should not get these vaccines? 

Vaccines are generally safe and do not cause any severe reaction. Vaccines are not given in case a child had a: 
Life-threatening allergic reaction after a dose vaccine
Severe allergy to any component of the vaccine

Side effects of vaccination
Most people who get any of the diphtheria vaccines will not face any serious side effects. But, in some cases vaccines can cause milder side effects which can be easily managed. Most of the effects usually go away on their own. The common side effects can include: 
Redness and swelling at the injection site
Fever
Loss of appetite
Tiredness
Vomiting
Headache
Chills
Body aches

Managing the side effects
All the side effects are usually mild and occur for a short period of time. They generally occur in the first 1-2 days of vaccination and do not require any specific treatment. However, following measures can be taken to reduce that. 
Consume fluids 
Avoid overdressing the children
Take paracetamol after consulting with doctor if the fever is high or to manage the swelling and pain at the injection site
Did you know?
Some vaccines are delivered as early as on birth such as BCG, oral polio vaccine or DPT vaccine which can prevent a wide range of diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis B, polio, etc. But there are some vaccines that you may not know about that have gained importance over time and that you might want to consider for your kids. Learn in detail about various lesser known vaccines that can benefit your child.
Click To Read!
Treatment Of Diphtheria

If diphtheria is suspected, the treatment usually begins before the confirmation of laboratory tests to avoid any complications. The symptoms, overall health, and age of the patient is considered before initiating the treatment.  The two main treatment options include: 
Diphtheria antitoxin (DAT)
The prompt administration (intravenous or intramuscular) of DAT is the most effective treatment for diphtheria. It aids in the neutralization of the unbound toxin produced by the bacteria in the blood. Antitoxin has no role in neutralizing the already bound toxin. Therefore, it is necessary to administer it as early as possible to avoid complications. 
Antibiotics
The treatment of antibiotics is usually effective before the bacteria starts releasing toxins in the blood. It offers benefits such as: 
Reduces the amount of toxins released in the blood
Fastens the recovery
Prevents the spread of infection

The commonly used antibiotics in diphtheria infection are erythromycin and penicillin G. linezolid and vancomycin are also used in case of antibiotic resistance. A full course of antibiotics, as advised by the doctor should be followed by the patient to completely remove the bacteria from the system. 

Read 11 valuable tips to be followed while taking antibiotics.
Click To Know!

Diphtheria is a severe and a highly infectious disease. Apart from the basic treatment given, the procedure may also include:
  Hospitalization of the patient 
Isolation to reduce the transmission
Other medicines such as corticosteroids, adrenaline or antihistamines to reduce any severe reaction to the antitoxin given
Tracheostomy (surgical insertion of a tube in the windpipe), in case of severe breathing difficulties
Surgery to remove the gray membrane in the throat, if necessary
Treatment of complications, for example medications to treat myocarditis (inflammation of the heart) 
Bed rest for about one month or longer, for complete recovery
Cleaning sores with soap and water, in case of skin diphtheria
Home-care For Diphtheria

Eat soft food diet
Diphtheria causes sore throat and difficulty in swallowing. It is better to consume soft foods and liquids.
Self isolation
Since diphtheria is a highly contagious disease, it is necessary to isolate the patients to reduce the spread of infection. 
Maintain hygiene
Strict hygiene should be maintained by the people who are caring for diphtheria patients. The precautionary measures such as washing hands, particularly before cooking food and handling the patient should be followed. 
Get vaccinated 
Vaccination is also necessary for the patient who has recovered from the diphtheria infection because it can occur again also. The care-takers and the people who are in close contact with the patient should also take a booster dose of vaccine. 
Take sufficient rest
The recovery of the patient is generally very slow, especially if the infection was severe. Such people are advised to take proper rest for a couple of weeks. The normal physical exertion may be harmful if the disease has affected the heart. 
Close contacts get tested
The people who are in close contact with the patient should go for the test of diphtheria. The treatment protocol is initiated in these people in case of any suspicion. This is required even in the people who have been vaccinated. 
Did you know?
Diphtheria was a very common cause of death in children and adolescents in the 1920s. The diphtheria vaccine, first used in the United States in the early 1940s, has virtually eliminated the disease. Now very few cases are seen in the world, especially in the developed countries. But, outbreaks still occur around the world with a drop in immunization rates.
Alternative Therapies For Diphtheria

Home remedies
Diphtheria is a severe respiratory illness. Doctors should be immediately consulted to avoid any life threatening complications. The treatment of diphtheria consists of antibiotics and antitoxin. However, some home remedies can be used as an adjunct to medical treatment. It is also advisable to consult the doctor before starting any home remedies: 

Garlic (Lehsun): Chewing a clove of garlic every three to four hours for a week helps to reduce fever associated with diphtheria. It also helps to soothe the throat.

Pineapple: Pineapple juice helps in removing the throat deposits. It contains bromelain that is effective in managing coughing. 

Basil leaves (tulsi): The antibacterial property of tulsi helps in reducing respiratory infections. It can be consumed as water infused with basil leaves.

Passion flower: This herb can help to alleviate symptoms of diphtheria. Add a tablespoon of the passion flower powder to a cup of boiling water. Strain and drink it at least twice a day. 

Castor leaves: It possesses anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties that help to manage the condition. Ground castor leaves can be taken orally. A paste of castor leaves, garlic juice and drumstick leaves can also be inhaled to clear the nasal passage. 
Complications Of Diphtheria

The pseudomembrane formed by the bacteria separates from the tissues in 7 to 10 days. The toxin produced by the bacteria can reach the heart, kidney, muscles, and liver which can cause various severe complications: 
Cardiac complications
The heart is usually the first organ to be affected. Diphtheria usually affects the heart in the second or third week. The patient can develop: 
Myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle i.e, myocardium)
Cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat)
Circulatory collapse 
Neurological complications
The toxin can affect the nerves of the brain, extremities and muscles of the pharynx and soft palate causing:
Neuritis (may lead to respiratory failure and pneumonia)
Nerve weakness
Encephalitis (rare in children) 
Oculomotor nerve palsy (Involuntary movement of eyeball)
Reflux of food through nose
Respiratory obstruction
In most of the cases, the pseudomembrane blocks the respiratory tract and can cause
suffocation. This requires immediate mechanical ventilation and intubation. 
Kidney damage
The toxin released in the blood can also damage the kidney, thereby affecting their ability to filter wastes from the blood. 
Living With Diphtheria

Here are a few simple tips which could help to deal better with diphtheria infection:
Choose food wisely
The patients of diphtheria usually find it hard to swallow food due to the development of an artificial membrane in the throat. Liquids and soft food items might help in this condition. The incorporation of healthy foods such as fresh fruits and vegetables in the form of juices and smoothies may also speed up the recovery process. 

Foods to be taken
Fluids (juices)
Milk
Garlic
Food in semi-solid form (ice creams)
Fruits and vegetables

Foods to be avoided
Spicy food
Saturated oils and trans fats
Keep hydrated
Drinking enough water especially before bedtime helps in clearing the throat and loosening the mucus.
Take plenty of rest
Rest plays a very crucial role in complete recovery of the diphtheria patient. Avoid vigorous exercise and take sufficient rest as advised by the doctor. Avoid resuming physical activities early and give the body some time to heal completely from the effects of the bacteria. 
Sleep the right way
The patient should avoid sleeping on the back as it can trigger the accumulation of mucus in the throat. It is advised to use a thick pillow or use two pillows. This helps in elevating the trunk region, thus opening up the airways. 
Practice Yoga 
Do some breathing exercises such as pranayama. This will ease the breathing process. Some yoga such as sarvangasana and uttanasana relaxes the body and helps in sound sleep. 
Frequently Asked Questions
How serious is diphtheria?
How does diphtheria spread?
Can you get diphtheria more than once?
Who should get diphtheria vaccines?
How many doses of vaccine are needed?
How effective are diphtheria vaccines?
Which diphtheria vaccine should be given to pregnant women?
References
Diphtheria, Department Of Health, New York State, Last Updated On: January, 2012.
Diphtheria, National Foundation For Infectious Diseases, Last Updated On: April 2021.
Diphtheria, Center For Disease Control & Prevention, Last Updated On: 26th May 2020.
Diphtheria, Australian Government, Department Of Health, Last Updated On: 16th February 2022.
Lamichhane A, Radhakrishnan S. Diphtheria. [Updated 2021 Nov 13]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Diphtheria, Immunization, HHS.gov, Last Updated On: 29th April, 2021.
Diphtheria, World Health Organization, Last updated On: 27th November 2017.
Diphtheria, History Of Vaccines,The College Of Physicians Of Philadelphia. Last Updated On: 09th April 2022.
Diphtheria, Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization, Last updated On: 27th November 2017.
Diphtheria, Health, Johns Hopkins Medicine.
Diphtheria, Communicable Disease Service, NJ Health, Department Of Health, State Of New Jersey.
Diphtheria, Virginia Department Of Health Last Updated On: October 2018.


===============================================


