Coronary artery disease
Also known as Ischemic heart disease, Coronary heart disease, and Arteriosclerotic heart disease
Overview
  Coronary artery disease (CAD), refers to the narrowing or blockage of coronary arteries (that supply blood to the heart) with plaque-like deposits. Over time, this results in restriction or obstruction of the flow of blood to the heart muscle. This can manifest in the form of chest discomfort (angina), a heart attack (due to sudden total blockage of a coronary artery), slow progress to heart failure, or even sudden death, due to a life-threatening rhythm disturbance.
  Family history, advancing age, high blood pressure, an abnormal cholesterol profile, diabetes, obesity, and smoking are the major risk factors for CAD.
  Management of CAD includes lifestyle changes like consuming a heart-healthy diet, an exercise regime, and cessation of smoking and alcohol. Medications can help to manage risk factors along with treating the symptoms. Surgery might be advised in severe cases.


Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults after 35 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women, but more common in men
Body part(s) involved
Coronary arteries
Heart 
Prevalence
World: 20.1 million (2020)
India:  NA
Mimicking Conditions
One lung problem
Pulmonary embolism
Floppy mitral valve syndrome
Angina pectoris 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Necessary health tests/imaging
Imaging tests:
a. Non-Invasive tests:
Chest X-ray 
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Echocardiography
Stress test (Stress Thallium)
Computed tomography (CT) scan 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan 
Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) scanning
Coronary Calcium Scoring
Nuclear ventriculography
 b. Invasive tests :
Coronary angiography 
Electrophysiology Study

Lab tests :
Total Cholesterol tests 
Triglycerides (Tg)
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 
High sensitivity C reactive protein 
Lipoprotein (a)
Troponin test 
Homocysteine
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
Treatment
1. Medications:
Blood thinners: Clopidogrel, Rivaroxaban, Ticagrelor, Aspirin
Beta blockers: Atenolol, Bisoprolol, Metoprolol 
Statins: Rosuvastatin, Pravastatin, Atorvastatin
Calcium channel blockers:  Amlodipine, Verapamil ,  Diltiazem
Nitrates: Glyceryl trinitrate, Isosorbide mononitrate.
ACE inhibitors: Ramipril, Lisinopril.
2. Surgery 
See All
Symptoms Of Coronary Artery Disease 

Angina or chest pain is the most common symptom of CAD. Angina develops when too much plaque deposits inside the arteries and narrows them. 
Angina may cause symptoms like-
Heaviness 
Pressure 
Tightening 
Burning 
Indigestion
Heartburn 
Sweating 

For many people, a heart attack is the first clue that they have CAD. A few symptoms of a heart attack include-
Chest pain or angina 
Weakness 
Nausea 
Cold sweat
Discomfort in the arms or shoulder 
Shortness of breath or trouble breathing
Heart palpitations

Over time, CAD can weaken the heart muscle. This may lead to heart failure, a life-threatening condition where the heart cannot pump blood the way it should.

Are you confused between angina, heartburn, and heart attack?
Learn the difference
Types Of Coronary Artery Disease 

The different forms of coronary artery disease include:

1. Obstructive coronary artery disease
This is the most common type of coronary artery disease. It develops when coronary arteries gradually narrow due to plaque buildup. As artery narrowing progresses, it can eventually block blood flow to the heart. 

2. Nonobstructive coronary artery disease
This is not the result of plaque buildup but occurs due to other coronary artery problems, such as
Constriction at inappropriate times 
Malfunctioning in smaller artery branches 
Damage to the artery lining

Note: This form of CAD is more common in females than males. 

3. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD)
SCAD occurs when a tear in the wall of the coronary artery partially or completely blocks the blood flow. This form can unexpectedly present as a heart attack. 
Causes Of Coronary Artery Disease 

Atherosclerosis or gradual buildup of plaque in coronary arteries (the major blood vessels in the body that supply blood to the heart) causes coronary artery disease. 

Over time, this plaque which is made up of cholesterol, waste products, calcium, and fibrin (which helps in blood clotting) narrows or blocks the coronary arteries. This affects their function to supply enough blood, oxygen and nutrients to the heart. It leads to chest pain and puts you at the risk of a heart attack.
Risk Factors For Coronary Artery Disease 

Multiple risk factors can lead to coronary artery disease. They are broadly divided into non- modifiable and modifiable factors:

1. Non-modifiable risk factors
Hereditary 
Genetic factors are a significant risk factor of CAD. People with a family history of CAD are more prone to develop this condition.

Age 
The risk of CAD significantly increases after 35 years of age in both men and women. 

Gender 
Men are more likely to have CAD as compared to women. Evidence has shown that lipoprotein (a) which is a cardiovascular risk factor seems to be elevated in men more than in women.
2. Modifiable risk factors
Hypertension (High Blood Pressure) 
High blood pressure Is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease. It is characterized by blood pressure in the arteries and other blood vessels greater than 185/115 mm Hg.

Is your blood pressure under control? Explore our wide range of BP monitors to check your BP at the comfort of your home.
Click to shop

Abnormal cholesterol profile
An abnormal cholesterol profile or more precisely dyslipidemia. ie. Excessive bad cholesterol (triglycerides and LDL) and less good cholesterol (HDL) in the blood is a major risk factor for the development of CAD. The extra cholesterol circulating in the bloodstream forms the basis for plaque blocking the arteries, robbing the heart of oxygen rich blood supply. 
  Diabetes mellitus 
Diabetes is a condition in which the blood glucose levels in the body stay consistently above normal. The risk of heart disease is 2.5 times higher in men and 2.4 times higher in women in diabetic individuals as compared to those without diabetes. 
  India is the Diabetes capital of the world. Diabetes not only predisposes to heart disease but a plethora of other long-term complications. Watch our expert talk about Diabetes, its various complications, and their prevention.




Obesity 
Obesity increases the development and progression of coronary artery disease (CAD). Over 80% of individuals with CHD are overweight or obese.

Being overweight or obesity is the root cause of a wide range of diseases including heart diseases. 
Click to read more

Lack of physical activity 
Sedentary lifestyle predisposes obesity, high blood pressure, and high bad cholesterol, and diabetes, which are all major risk factors of CAD.

Diet rich in unhealthy fats
Diet loaded with saturated fats, trans fat, and packaged food increases the risk of obesity and high bad cholesterol by many folds. This results in excessive plaque formation in coronary arteries, leading to CAD.
  Vitamin D deficiency
Moderate to severe vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases including high blood pressure, CAD, and heart failure. 
  Read about various causes of Vitamin D and when to get tested for its optimum levels.
Have a glance


Excessive alcohol intake
Drinking too much alcohol can raise blood pressure levels and the risk of heart disease. It has been recommended that women should have no more than 1 drink a day and men should have no more than 2 drinks a day. 
  Tobacco
The usage of tobacco and exposure to secondhand smoke significantly increases the risk of heart diseases. Smoking increases plaque deposition in arteries and reduces the capacity of blood to carry oxygen, predisposing to CAD.
  Looking to quit smoking? Try our range of smoking cessation products and detach yourself from this deadly habit
Buy now


Periodontitis 
It is a severe gum infection that can lead to tooth loss. Research has suggested that periodontitis can expose the body to oral bacteria which can lead to the development of plaque buildup in blood vessels and coronary heart disease.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) exhibit an elevated risk of coronary artery disease due to accelerated aging of the cardiovascular system.

Air pollution 
When a person breathes poor-quality air, the pollutants can travel deep into the bloodstream, through the lungs, to the heart. This increases the risk of developing heart and circulatory diseases. 
A study has found that long-term exposure to air pollution can lead to premature aging of blood vessels. This contributes to the rapid buildup of calcium in the coronary arteries, predisposing to plaque formation and CAD.
Did you know?
There is a direct association between road traffic noise exposure and heart disease. Research has shown that exposure to noise levels greater than 60 dB is associated with coronary artery disease in adults. Moreover, traffic noise at night can cause repetitive sleep interruptions, leading to elevated stress hormones. This can predispose to high blood pressure and cardiovascular diseases.
Diagnosis Of Coronary Artery Disease 

CAD is usually diagnosed through physical examination and relevant diagnostic tests. Suppose a person already has symptoms like chest pain, shortness of breath, and cold sweat; in that case, the doctor will examine the heart's electrical activity rate and the heartbeat's regularity and send the individual for further diagnosis. 

Physical examination and medical history 

A medical practitioner usually diagnoses CAD through a physical examination and medical history. 
The doctor will check parameters like blood pressure and ask about medical history, lifestyle, and family history (to check whether heart disease is among your biological parents and siblings).
The symptoms of chest pain and pain in the jaw, neck, left arm, or back is assessed. Shortness of breath is evaluated during rest and in case of activity.

Imaging tests 
The medical practitioner may recommend one or more tests to assess heart function and diagnose CAD:

1. Non-Invasive tests 
Chest X-ray 
This test uses a small amount of radiation to create images of the chest, including your heart.

Electrocardiogram (ECG)
ECG is a cost-effective and readily available test for the evaluation of coronary artery disease. This test helps record the heart's electrical activity. 

Echocardiography
Echocardiography is an ultrasound of the heart. This noninvasive test translates sound waves from your chest into pictures of your heart. It allows the doctor to check the heartbeat and pumping of blood. 

Stress test
Stress test is used to check how well your heart and blood vessels are working under stress. In this, your heart may be put under stress with medicine or exercise. The images from the ultrasound show your heart structure and how well your heart muscles are pumping blood.

Computed tomography (CT) scan 
It is a diagnostic imaging procedure that uses a fusion of X-rays and computer technology to produce images of the inside of the body. The scan looks in the coronary arteries for plaque buildup. 

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan 
An MRI scan is a painless test that produces very clear images of the organs and structures inside your body using radio and computer-generated radio waves. This test helps in detecting tissue damage or problems with blood flow in the heart or coronary arteries. 

Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) scanning
A PET scan of the heart is a noninvasive nuclear imaging test that uses radioactive tracers to produce pictures of the heart. This test can detect areas of the heart muscle which are receiving insufficient blood due to heart damage.

Coronary Calcium Scoring
This test measures the amount of calcified plaque (calcium) inside the walls of the heart’s arteries. This information obtained can help evaluate whether a person is at increased risk of a heart attack.

Nuclear ventriculography
This test is a noninvasive procedure that uses radioactive materials called tracers to show the heart chambers. The tracers attach to the red blood cells and pass through the heart. The movement of the tracers helps detect any anomaly in the heart. 


2. Invasive tests 
Coronary angiography 
This test, also called cardiac catheterization, is a gold standard test for diagnosing CAD. This test is performed under local anesthesia and involves injecting a contrast dye into the coronary arteries via tubes called catheters. It shows the extent and severity of heart blockages.

Electrophysiology Study
This is an invasive test to assess the heart's electrical system or is used to diagnose abnormal heartbeats or arrhythmia. The test is performed by inserting catheters and wire electrodes, which measure electrical activity, through the blood vessels that enter the heart.

Lab tests 
Total  cholesterol 
This test measures the total amount of cholesterol in the blood. A total cholesterol level of less than 200 mg/dL (5.17 mmol/L) is normal and cholesterol levels greater than 240 mg/dL (6.21 mmol/L) are high.

Triglycerides (Tg)
Triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood. They come from extra calories that are not used immediately after eating and are stored in fat cells. High levels of TG can increase the risk of heart diseases like CAD. Triglyceride levels less than 150 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L) are considered optimal.

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 
LDL is bad cholesterol. Elevated levels of  LDL cholesterol causes plaque accumulation in the arteries, which reduces blood flow and increases the risk of heart diseases. The normal level of LDL should be less than 100 mg/dL and levels greater than 190 mg/dL are considered very high and pose a high risk of CAD. 

High-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
HDL is good cholesterol. High levels of HDL reduce the risk of CAD by carrying away LDL and keeping the blood flow more easily. HDL levels greater than 60 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) are good for the heart and levels less than 40 mg/dL increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. 

High sensitivity C reactive protein 
A high level of CRP in the blood has been linked to an increased risk of heart diseases. It can also help to determine the risk before any symptoms appear.  

Lipoprotein (a) 
Lipoprotein (a) is a low-density lipoprotein attached to a protein called apo (a) that helps in  transporting cholesterol in the blood. High blood lipoprotein (a) levels may be indicative of a high risk of heart disease, blood clots, and stroke. The elevation of lipoprotein (a) is majorly caused by a genetic factor and runs in families.

Troponin 
This test measures the levels of troponin T or troponin I proteins in the blood. These proteins are released when the heart muscle is damaged and determine the risk of heart diseases. 

Homocysteine
This test measures the amount of homocysteine, an amino acid in the body. Increased serum homocysteine levels are positively correlated with severity of CAD.

B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
BNP helps the body to eliminate fluids and relaxes blood vessels. In the case of heart damage, the body secretes high levels of BNP into the blood to ease the strain on the heart. BNP levels increase gradually as the number of diseased coronary arteries increases. 

Book your tests from the comfort of your home.
Book Here
Celebs affected
Bill Clinton
Bill Clinton was the 42 president of the United States. He underwent surgery to fix blocked arteries twice. Since then he has tried to lose weight and regained control of his health by eating a diet rich in legumes, vegetables, and fruits.
Prevention Of Coronary Artery Disease 

The following tips can help in preventing or reducing the risk for coronary artery disease:

1. Consume a healthy diet

A healthy, balanced and wholesome diet plays a pivotal role in prevention of coronary artery disease. Here are some food items that you should prefer and the others you should avoid in your diet. 
Foods to prefer-
Green leafy vegetables
Legumes 
Whole fruits
Whole grains like wheat, brown rice, jowar, ragi and bajra
Low-fat or fat-free milk or yogurt
Unsalted nuts and seeds
Eggs, fish, seafood, lean poultry
Vegetable and nut oils like olive oil, canola oil

Foods to limit or avoid-
Refined grains like white flour or white bread
Table sugar
Sugar-sweetened beverages
Packaged foods
Red and processed meats
Butter, coconut, palm, cottonseed and palm kernel oils and other oils that congeal at room temperature 
Alcohol consumption 
High salt intake

A DASH diet or Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension diet is a novel concept that emphasizes on portion control of food, getting the adequate amount of nutrients, and to lower down the risk of hypertension and eventually CAD.
Read more about DASH

2. Indulge in physical activity 
Combining a healthy diet with regular exercise is the best way of maintaining a healthy weight. It has been noted that regular exercise makes your heart and blood circulatory system more robust, lowers your cholesterol level, and also keeps your blood pressure under control. 

Try these easy exercises to keep your heart in good health.
Explore now

3. Avoid smoking 
Smoking is never a good idea for your heart's health. It has been researched that giving up on smoking significantly reduces the risk of developing coronary heart disease. 

Looking to quit smoking, but finding it very difficult? Read about some practical ways that will help you get rid of this unhealthy habit 
Check Out

4. Manage your stress effectively
Stress, anxiety, and negative mental health is associated with an increased risk of heart diseases and stroke. While stress is hands in glove with this fast paced world, it can be really detrimental to health. Hence we need to find ways to manage stress in ways that best suit us. 

Is stress affecting your overall well being? Try some relaxation techniques to manage stress.
Read to explore

5. Get sound and sufficient sleep 
Research has shown that poor sleep quality is associated with high blood pressure, elevated cholesterol, which are major risk factors of CAD. A healthy diet, regular exercise, sleep hygiene and low stress may promote deep and restorative sleep essential for good cardiovascular health.

Struggling to fall asleep? Read about some amazing tips that will help you sleep like a baby.
Explore tips

6. Keep your blood pressure under control 
Always maintain your blood pressure under control. Eat a healthy diet, exercise regularly, and, if needed, take prescribed medications to lower your blood pressure.

Read these practical tips that will help you keep blood pressure in check. 
Click to read
Did you know?
This is some good news for all coffee lovers. Research has shown that having two to three cups of black coffee a day has been associated with lowering the risk of developing coronary heart disease. Not just this, coffee has some other amazing health benefits too.
Read along
Doctor To Visit

The doctors that can be consulted for diagnosis and management of CAD are:

Cardiologists

A cardiologist is a physician who specializes in the treatment of disorders of the heart and the blood vessels. 

Consult our team of trusted doctors. 
Book a consultation now
Treatment Of Coronary Artery Disease 

Treatment for coronary artery disease (CAD) involves managing the symptoms and reducing the risk of further problems. CAD can be managed effectively with a combination of lifestyle changes, medications, and, in a few cases, surgery.

A. Medications
The main aim of medications is to either reduce blood pressure or ease blood flow in arteries.

1. Blood thinners 
Blood thinners are a class of medicine that helps in reducing the risk of a heart attack by thinning the blood and preventing it from clotting.
Common blood thinners are
Clopidogrel
Rivaroxaban
Ticagrelor
Aspirin

2. Beta blockers 
These medicines are used to treat angina and high blood pressure. 
Common beta blockers are
Atenolol
Bisoprolol
Metoprolol 

3. Statins 
This class of drugs works by blocking the formation of bad cholesterol (low-density lipoprotein, LDL). 
Common statins are
Rosuvastatin
Pravastatin
Atorvastatin

4. Calcium channel blockers
This class of drug works by decreasing blood pressure by relaxing the muscles, which causes the arteries to become wider and reduces blood pressure. 
Common calcium blockers are
Amlodipine
Verapamil 
Diltiazem

Note- Popping calcium supplements without consulting your doctor could increase the risk of plaque buildup in arteries. Learn more about this. 
Click Here to Learn

5. Nitrates 
Nitrates are referred to as vasodilators that are used to widen your blood vessels. They work by relaxing blood vessels, allowing more blood to pass through them and thus lowering the blood pressure.
Common Nitrates are
Glyceryl trinitrate 
Isosorbide mononitrate

These drugs are available in a variety of forms, like tablets, sprays, and skin patches 

6. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
This class of drug is used in the treatment of high blood pressure. This drug blocks the activity of a hormone called angiotensin-2, which causes the blood vessels to narrow.
Common ACE inhibitors are
Ramipril
Lisinopril

Note- Heart medications should never be stopped suddenly without consulting your doctor as there is a risk of making symptoms worse.

B. Surgery 
In case of narrowing blood vessels as result of a build-up of fatty deposits or no relief in symptoms by taking the prescribed medicines, surgery may be needed to open up or bypass blocked arteries.

Coronary angioplasty
This is also known as percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), or balloon angioplasty. During the procedure, a small balloon is inserted to push the fatty tissue in the narrowed artery outwards which allows the blood to flow more easily. Coronary angioplasty is either a planned procedure in cases of angina or is performed as an emergency treatment for a heart attack.

Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
CABG is also known as bypass surgery or a heart bypass. It is a procedure to restore blood flow to areas of your heart that are blocked, causing heart attacks and CAD. 

Heart transplant
When the heart is severely damaged and is unable to adequately pump blood around the body, a heart transplant may be needed.
Did you know?
Patients with COVID-19 are at an increased risk of a broad range of heart disorders. In a vicious loop, cardiac risk factors such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes increase the risk of acquiring COVID-19 infection in the first place and lead to worse cardiovascular outcomes after COVID-19.
Read more about COVID-19
Complications Of Coronary Artery Disease 

1. Chest pain (angina)
In the case of narrowed coronary arteries, the blood supply to the heart is not enough. This can lead to chest pain (angina) or shortness of breath.

2. Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias)
When the heart does not receive sufficient blood and oxygen due to CAD, the normal heart signaling can get altered leading to irregular heartbeats.

3. Heart failure
The narrowed arteries due to CAD makes the heart weak and difficult for the heart to perform its functions. Heart failure occurs when the heart can't pump blood well enough to meet the requirements of the body.

4. Heart attack
Rupture of plaque in one of the coronary arteries can result in the formation of blood clots. This blood clot can stop the supply of blood and oxygen to the heart leading to a heart attack.
Did you know?
Cardiovascular diseases are one of the leading causes of mortality in India and CAD is one of the most common among them. Here is a list of common factors that increase the risk of a heart attack.
Click to read
Home Care For Coronary Artery Disease 

Lifestyle changes are a cornerstone to improving your heart health. Staying physically active and making wise choices of foods to eat help in managing CAD. 
  1. Engaging in physical activity 
Living with a heart condition can make you feel hesitant to exercise. Whether you have undergone heart surgery or are taking medication for a heart condition, don’t shy away from exercising. It is an important part of keeping your heart in good health. The following guidelines will help you in your exercising journey:

Doctor’s Consent: Always make sure to consult your doctor about which exercises are beneficial for you according to your health. Exercise programs, especially for patients with heart conditions, have to be tailored according to the individual’s exercise capacity and risk profile.
Aerobic exercises: Aerobic exercises are usually advised for individuals with CAD, as they help the heart to utilize oxygen better and improve blood circulation. You can choose an aerobic activity such as brisk walking, stretching, swimming, or light jogging. Do these for 15-20 minutes, 3-4 times a week. Always start slowly and gradually increase the pace. 
Resistance training: Lifting weights increases muscle strength by making the muscles work against a weight or force. This training can be performed 2–3 days per week and includes one set of 8–10 exercises targeting all major muscle groups. Make sure to workout under the supervision of a professional trainer.
Warm up & cool down: Always perform a short warm-up session before starting the main exercise. After exercising, it is equally important to cool-down.
Take a break when tired: Take a break of a few minutes in between sessions if you get too tired. Sip some water. If you continue to feel exhausted, stop exercising. Also, don’t overexert yourself if you are unwell or have a fever.
Wear right clothing: Wear comfortable and breathable clothes that enable you to stretch easily while exercising.

Are you still apprehensive about starting to exercise after stent surgery? Read some tips that will help you navigate your exercising journey post surgery.
Click to read

2. Making dietary changes amicable to heart health
After the diagnosis of CAD, making dietary changes can improve the condition of your heart and also reduce the risk of having further episodes. Quitting smoking and alcohol intake goes without saying.

Watch this informative video to learn about dietary modifications for improving your heart’s health. 

A special mention to these ‘Star nutrients’
  Omega-3 fatty acids
Omega-3 fatty acids are “healthy fats” that support heart health. They help in reducing the inflammation and triglycerides, mildly lower blood pressure, and boosts immune functioning. 
Rich sources of Omega-3 fatty acids include:
Nuts and seeds like flax seeds, chia seeds, and walnuts
Plant oils such as flaxseed oil, soybean oil, and canola oil
Fish, especially cold-water fatty fish, such as salmon, mackerel, tuna, herring, and sardines and other seafood 

Supplements can be considered under the guidance of a health care provider.
Explore our wide range of  omega fatty acid supplements.
Fill your cart now


Vitamin D
Research has shown that vitamin D is beneficial for reducing the risk of heart disease. Bask in the morning sunshine for optimum levels of this vitamin. You can also load your plate with foods rich in vitamin D like milk, eggs, fortified orange juice, tuna and soya milk.
  Fill any gaps in your Vitamin D levels by dietary supplements. Check out our wide range of supplements.
Explore now
Did you know?
Vitamins are not produced in the body. Therefore, they must be consumed adequately. However, vitamin D is an exception. Here are a few points which you need to know about vitamin D and why it is important.
Click Here to Know More
Alternative Therapies For Coronary Artery Disease

1. Yoga 
Yoga serves a vital role in maintaining and elevating the positive health of people suffering from CAD. Several studies have also suggested that yoga significantly improves risk factors like obesity, lipid profile, blood pressure, and diabetes mellitus.

Practicing yoga can keep your heart healthy
Read how

2. Acupuncture
Research has shown that acupuncture can be a viable complementary therapy for CAD as it can improve blood circulation throughout the body and within the heart.
Living With Coronary Artery Disease 

It's possible to lead a normal life after having heart surgery or problems like a heart attack. Here are a few tips that will help you in your journey of recovery from CAD:

1. Cardiac rehabilitation program
It is a major step for anyone recovering from a heart attack, heart failure, or other heart problem that requires surgery or medical care. This rehab program aims to improve the quality of life and prevent another cardiac event. A supervisor will guide you regarding 
Physical activity 
Healthy eating 
Ways to relieve stress and improve mental health

2. Coordinate with your doctor
Keep in regular touch with your doctor. Make sure to consult your doctor in case of any health issues.

3. Follow a proper medication regimen
Take the medications prescribed by your doctor regularly without fail. It is also a good idea to consult your doctor when starting any medication for other medical conditions, to avoid interactions between different drugs.

4. Join support groups
If you have a heart condition you might find it useful to meet other people who are facing a similar situation. This gives a sense of motivation to live with your condition.
Did you know?
Reducing personal exposure to air pollution using a highly efficient face mask can reduce symptoms and improve cardiac health measures of patients with coronary heart disease.
Frequently Asked Questions
What are the three crucial coronary artery disease symptoms?
Can you stop coronary artery disease from progressing?
Is coronary artery disease genetic?
Can CAD cause a stroke?
What worsens coronary artery disease?
References
Heart Disease. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. October 2022
Brown JC, Gerhardt TE, Kwon E. Risk Factors For Coronary Artery Disease. [Updated 2022 Jun 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet].
Danik JS, Manson JE. Vitamin d and cardiovascular disease. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2012 Aug;14
Rabito MJ, Kaye AD. Complementary and alternative medicine and cardiovascular disease: an evidence-based review. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013
Coronary Artery Disease. What is coronary artery disease? Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. July 2021.
Overview. Coronary Artery Disease. March 2020.
Shahjehan RD, Bhutta BS. Coronary Artery Disease. [Updated 2022 Nov 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan
InformedHealth.org [Internet]. Cologne, Germany: Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG); 2006-. Coronary artery disease: Overview. 2013 Feb 13
Olvera Lopez E, Ballard BD, Jan A. Cardiovascular Disease. [Updated 2022 Aug 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan
Hajar R. Risk Factors for Coronary Artery Disease: Historical Perspectives. Heart Views. 2017 Jul-Sep;18
Bazzano LA, He J, Ogden LG, Loria C, Vupputuri S, Myers L, Whelton PK. Legume consumption and risk of coronary heart disease in US men and women: NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. Arch Intern Med. 2001 Nov 26
Cai Q, Mukku VK, Ahmad M. Coronary artery disease in patients with chronic kidney disease: a clinical update. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2013 Nov;9
Karnoutsos K, Papastergiou P, Stefanidis S, Vakaloudi A. Periodontitis as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease: the role of anti-phosphorylcholine and anti-cardiolipin antibodies. Hippokratia. 2008 Jul
Brown JC, Gerhardt TE, Kwon E. Risk Factors For Coronary Artery Disease. [Updated 2022 Jun 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan
Manchanda SC. Yoga--a promising technique to control cardiovascular disease. Indian Heart J. 2014 Sep-Oct
Gilani, T.A., Mir, M.S. Association of road traffic noise exposure and prevalence of coronary artery disease: A cross-sectional study in North India. Environ Sci Pollut Res 28
Abbasi J. The COVID Heart—One Year After SARS-CoV-2 Infection, Patients Have an Array of Increased Cardiovascular Risks. JAMA. 2022
Fact sheet. Coronary Heart Disease and Exercise.
Nocini, Riccardoa; Favaloro, Emmanuel J.b; Sanchis-Gomar, Fabianc; Lippi, Giusepped. Periodontitis, coronary heart disease and myocardial infarction: treat one, benefit all. Blood Coagulation & Fibrinolysis 31(6):p 339-345, September 2020.
Brown JC, Gerhardt TE, Kwon E. Risk Factors For Coronary Artery Disease. In: StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing, Treasure Island (FL); 2022.


===============================================


