Excessive sweating
Also known as Hyperhidrosis
Overview
Excessive sweating, known as hyperhidrosis, is a condition characterized by uncontrollable and profuse sweating beyond what is necessary for temperature regulation. It can occur in specific areas such as the armpits, palms, and soles of the feet, or affect the entire body.  It affects both men and women equally, but women tend to seek more care.

While the exact cause is not always known, excessive sweating can be due to certain underlying medical conditions, medications, or hormonal imbalances. It can also be triggered by certain foods and emotional stress.

Treatment options range from conservative measures such as antiperspirants, clothing modifications, and lifestyle changes, to more advanced approaches like medications, iontophoresis, botox injections, and surgical interventions.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Face
Hands 
Feet
Armpits
Groins
Mimicking Conditions
Thyrotoxicosis
Neuropathy
Hypoglycemia
Pheochromocytoma
Menopause
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Alcohol use disorder
Necessary health tests/imaging
Laboratory tests: Complete blood count (CBC), Thyroid-stimulating hormone, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR), Antinuclear antibody, Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C), and Chest x-ray.
Starch-iodine test
Quantitative sudometry 
Filter paper test
Treatment
Topical application
Antiperspirants
Astringents

Oral Medications

Anticholinergics: Glycopyrrolate, Bornaprine, and Methantheline bromide

Alpha-adrenergic agonists: Clonidine

Calcium channel blockers: Diltiazem

Beta-blockers: Propranolol

 Benzodiazepines: Diazepam

Botox injections

Surgery
Specialists to consult
Dermatologist
Symptoms Of Excessive Sweating

Excessive sweating is usually seen in the palms, soles, face, head, or armpits. Other visible symptoms include:

Excessive body odor
Sweat-soaked clothing
Sweating even while sitting
Difficulty in holding objects
Extremely soft and white skin
Skin peels off easily
Skin infections
Psychological symptoms

Increased heart rate 
Palpitations
Gastric disturbances.

Is your excessive sweating causing body odor? Read more about 7 effective ways to get rid of it.
Click now

Types of Excessive Sweating

There are two major types of excessive sweating:

Primary hyperhidrosis: It is usually seen if one of the family members may have had it. Studies suggest that primary hyperhidrosis begins in childhood and worsens with puberty, especially in women.
Secondary hyperhidrosis: It is caused by some other condition or behavior like neurologic syndromes, thyrotoxicosis, diabetes mellitus, gout, menopause, chronic alcoholism, etc.
Apart from these, there are other types of excessive sweating that include:
Night sweats: These are generally associated with menopause, infection, malignancy, or endocrine disease. Also, fluctuating sleep depth due to sleep apnoea, pains, restless legs, etc., can cause excessive sweating.
Food-triggered (Gustatory) sweating: Everyone knows that your face sweats when you consume highly spiced food. This gustatory hyperhidrosis is seen following salivary gland surgery and is then called Frey’s syndrome. It is also seen in uncontrolled diabetes.
Causes Of Excessive Sweating

Our body has a mechanism to regulate sweating. However, in excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), this mechanism may not work properly. The negative feedback to the hypothalamus, a structure deep within your brain, which tells it to stop signaling the sweat glands, may be impaired. As a result, the body ends up sweating more than necessary to cool down.
Risk Factors For Excessive Sweating

Excessive sweating is a general feature seen during hot and humid conditions. However, if it is chronic then it can lead to discomfort. There are certain triggers that can lead to excessive sweating. They include:
1. Genetics
Several studies suggest that primary hyperhidrosis has a genetic component as demonstrated by the high frequency of positive family histories.
2. Fever
A fever or febrile illness is commonly associated with excessive sweating. Managing kids with fevers can be quite a task. Listen to our experts talk about natural remedies to get relief from fever.

Watch this video now

3. Certain Conditions
Secondary hyperhidrosis can occur in the following conditions:

Diabetes mellitus
Hyperthyroidism
Parkinson's disease
Neurologic disorders

4. Medications 
Drugs that can induce hyperhidrosis, or sweating in excess include:
Antidepressants
Dopamine agonists
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Antipsychotics
Insulin

5. Menopause
The excessive sweating associated with menopause is considered to be a form of secondary hyperhidrosis and is generally known as hot flashes.

Check out our exclusive range of menopause items to support your well-being and manage symptoms effectively.
Buy them now
6. Anxiety
Studies have shown that excessive sweating is a potentially disabling symptom, which is often triggered in social anxiety disorder (SAD). It is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others. 
7. Chronic excessive alcohol consumption
Excessive sweating in palms and soles is frequently observed in patients with a clinical history of chronic abnormal alcoholic intake.
8. Tumors
Excessive sweating can occur in cancer or cancer treatment. Tumors such as pheochromocytoma (a rare tumor that usually forms in the adrenal glands, which are located on top of the kidneys) and lymphoma (cancer of the lymphatic system) known to cause hyperhidrosis.
Diagnosis Of Excessive Sweating

To diagnose excessive sweating, it is important to first determine whether the source is primary or secondary and this can be done through a thorough history. The diagnosis consists of the following:
1. History and physical examination
Diagnosis of excessive sweating is usually made by a visual inspection. A family history and medical history can determine primary or secondary hyperhidrosis.
Primary hyperhidrosis is more commonly seen in the younger population. Symptoms that present later in life are mostly linked to a secondary cause.
2. Starch-iodine test
In this test iodine solution is applied to the skin and starch powder is applied on top of that. As soon as those substances are in contact with sweat, they turn violet in color. 
The distribution pattern of the color (or absence of it) helps in the identification of excessive sweating.
3. Quantitative sudometry 
The quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART) is a quantitative test assessing sweat glands innervated by small nerve fibers.
4. Filter paper test
This test is suitable to detect excessive sweating in the armpits. A pre-weighed filter paper is inserted into the armpit for a defined time period (60 sec or 5 min) and then weighed again. The difference corresponds to the amount of sweat released in mg/time can help diagnose hyperhidrosis. 
5. Other tests
If a secondary cause is suspected, a complete work-up is done to rule out infection, kidney dysfunction, malignancy, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, an inflammatory disorder, or connective tissue disease. Some of these tests include:
Complete blood count (CBC)
Basic metabolic panel
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR)
Antinuclear antibody
Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C)
Chest x-ray

Worried about where you can find all these tests? Well look no further, we have got it covered for you.

Book your tests here
Prevention Of Excessive Sweating

Here are a few things that you can adopt and a few you can avoid to prevent generalized excessive sweating. They include:
Do’s
Wear loose-fitting, breathable clothes to minimize signs of sweating
Wear socks that absorb moisture 
Change your socks at least twice a day if possible
Eat smaller frequent meals
Keep your moisturizers in the fridge to get the cooling effect during summers
Get a small handy fan to avoid sweating during hot weather.
Don’ts
Do not wear tight clothes or synthetic fabrics like nylon
Refrain from wearing enclosed boots or sports shoes that may cause your feet to sweat more
Avoid spicy food
Limit alcohol and caffeine consumption

Want to know some more practical ways of preventing and curbing body odor caused due to excessive sweating?
Enlighten yourself

Specialist To Visit

To address excessive sweating, it is crucial to identify its underlying cause. Consulting with a dermatologist(skin specialist) is essential as they can provide appropriate treatment for individuals experiencing this condition.

When to see a doctor?
Excessive sweating for 6 or more months
Sweating involves the armpits, palms, soles, and/or face
Sweating is on both sides of the body in symmetry
Decreased or no sweating at night
Sweating episodes last at least 7 days
Sweating impairs daily activities.

Consult India’s most trusted and well-qualified doctors if you are noticing these symptoms.
Book your appointment
Treatment Of Excessive Sweating

There are several treatment options available to manage or treat excessive sweating. These include:
1. Topical applications
Generally, topical applications are suitable only for cases of focal hyperhidrosis. The most commonly used ones include:
Antiperspirants: These are products designed to reduce sweat or perspiration on the skin. They are available in creams, powders, and sprays. Aluminum salts are added to many topical antiperspirants.
Astringents: These act by contraction or tightening of body tissues. In case of excessive sweating, they work by constricting the skin's pores, reducing sweat production, and providing a drying effect.

2. Oral Medications
Oral medication is reserved for treatment-resistant cases or generalized hyperhidrosis. Medications used include:
Anticholinergics: These are the most commonly used oral medications. Examples include:
Glycopyrrolate
Bornaprine
Methantheline bromide

Alpha-adrenergic agonists: These are used to treat localized types of excessive sweating. Clonidine is the most commonly used drug.

Calcium channel blockers: Calcium channel blockers like diltiazem inhibit the calcium-dependent release of acetylcholine and help to reduce sweating.

Other drugs: Beta-blockers (like propranolol) and benzodiazepines (like diazepam) are used to reduce anxiety-related excessive sweating.

Order medications in the comfort of your home with just one click.
Tap now


3. Iontophoresis
It is the process of passing a weak electrical current through the skin to block the sweat glands. 
The current is applied usually for 10-20 minutes per session, initially with 2 to 3 sessions per week. It is followed by maintenance sessions at 1 to 3 week intervals, depending upon the patient's response.
Iontophoresis may sound painful but is not.

4. Botox injections
Injection of botox (botulinum toxin) is an effective therapy for excessive sweating of the armpits, hands, feet, armpit, and face.
It works by inhibiting the release of acetylcholine, the chemical that activates sweat glands. 
The injections can be uncomfortable, but the use of a very small needle helps to minimize discomfort. 
They usually give around six months of relief from sweating. 

5. Surgery
It is the last resort when all other treatment modalities show no positive results. These include:
Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy: This surgery is used to treat sweating of the palms or face. The sympathetic nerves control sweating. A sympathectomy is an irreversible procedure during which at least one sympathetic ganglion (relay station between the nerves) is removed.
Removal of axillary(armpit) sweat glands: Sweat glands in the armpit (axilla) is removed by means of axillary curettage (removal of tissue) or liposuction (removal of fat).
Home Care For Excessive Sweating

The following home remedies are traditionally known to manage excessive sweating and gain some control over perspiration. However, make sure to take consent from your healthcare provider before trying these.

1. Apple cider vinegar: This is a natural astringent that tightens skin pores and helps control sweat production. It can also help rid your body of odor caused by bacteria by balancing the pH level.
How to use it: Soak a cotton ball in apple cider vinegar and apply it to your problem areas at night just before you go to bed. Wash it off of your skin in the morning.

Buy apple cider vinegar products online.
Tap now

2. Sage tea: It contains a natural astringent called tannic acid that has the ability to constrict and shrink your skin and pores to reduce sweat. Sage also helps to tackle the body odor of the armpits and feet.
How to use it: Add two sage tea bags to two cups of boiling water and then let it cool. Dab a clean towel in it and wipe your underarms, arms, and feet. Repeat two or more times daily for best results. You can also soak your feet in warm water with sage tea bags in it.

3. Black tea: It is a great natural antiperspirant due to its high levels of tannic acid. 
How to use it: Add two bags of black tea to four cups of boiling water. When the water is cool enough, soak your palms or feet for 20 minutes. 

4. Potatoes: These can absorb excess sweat on the body and act as a natural antiperspirant.
How to use it: Take a small piece of potato, and rub it on your sweat-prone areas. Let the potato residue dry completely before getting dressed.

Know more benefits of potatoes.
Click here

5. Baking Soda: Baking soda can be used to get rid of body odor.
How to use it: Mix equal parts baking soda and cornstarch. Add lavender essential oil for its sweet fragrance and apply the mixture with a damp cloth to clean the underarms. Rinse it off after 20-30 minutes.

Here are 5 more effective home remedies to get that bad odor off your feet.
Know more

6. Chamomile tea: Chamomile is one of the best herbs for eliminating stress and promoting relaxation which can help reduce sweating.
How to use it: Drink two to three cups of chamomile tea each day to stay calm and refreshed.
Complications Of Excessive Sweating

Excessive sweating may not be a life-threatening condition, but it sure has an effect on the quality of life. Some of the general complications include:
Skin problems: Excessive sweating can lead to several skin complications due to prolonged moisture and the breakdown of the skin's natural protective barrier. These include:
Body odor
Skin infections
Dermatitis (redness, itching, and irritation of the skin)
Friction between moist skin surfaces 
Eczema
Acne breakouts
Unusually soft or moist skin
Skin discoloration

Take care of your skin with our well-curated range of products to meet all your skin-care needs.
Try them now

Social embarrassment: It can be due to visible sweat stains and an unpleasant odor, making individuals self-conscious and affecting their confidence in social interactions.
Emotional distress: This is caused by negative body image, and increased anxiety due to concerns about appearance and social interactions.
Psychological distress: It can trigger feelings of embarrassment, shame, and self-consciousness, leading to anxiety, low self-esteem, and a negative impact on overall mental well-being.
Work or school-related disability: Excessive sweating can interfere with productivity, concentration, and performance due to constant discomfort, distraction, and the need for frequent clothing changes at school or work. 

Prioritize your mental health with our widest range of products to calm and nurture your mind. Explore mental wellness products.
Buy now
Did you know?
Night sweats are common in COVID-19 infections. Studies demonstrate that profuse sweating can happen at night due to COVID-19.
Know more about COVID-19
Alternative Therapies For Excessive Sweating

There are few alternative therapies that have shown good results in recent times to manage excessive sweating. They include:

1. Microwave thermolysis
This is a non-invasive method that causes local destruction of sweat glands through microwaves. It is used to treat excessive sweating in the armpits.
2. Cryotherapy
Topical cryotherapy uses a surface nitrous oxide cryoprobe applicator to freeze-damage the sweat glands. 
3. Microneedle radiofrequency (MNRF) 
The mechanism of action is the destruction of the sweat glands by heating. The radiofrequency generated by microneedles targets both the odor-producing and the water-producing glands. The results of this treatment last a long time.
4. Photodynamic therapy
This therapy involves using a photosensitizing agent. When the photosensitizer is exposed to specific light wavelengths, it generates reactive oxygen that targets and destroys sweat glands.
It is a safe and effective treatment for excessive sweating, particularly in areas like the armpits and palms.
6. Laser therapy
It is used for the treatment of underarm sweating, where lasers can precisely target, heat, and destroy the sweat glands. It is a safe, effective, and minimally invasive solution for excessive sweating.
7. Ultrasound
Micro-focused ultrasound is also an effective and well-tolerated treatment for excessive sweating in the armpits. It works by delivering focused ultrasound energy to the deeper layers of the skin, targeting and reducing sweat gland activity.
Living With Excessive Sweating

Living with excessive sweating can be challenging, as it can affect one's confidence and social interactions, but with proper management, support, and understanding, individuals can lead fulfilling lives and minimize the impact of excessive sweating on their daily activities. Tips that can help include:
1. Pay attention to personal hygiene
Individuals affected by hyperhidrosis should bathe daily and pay special attention to drying affected areas of skin (particularly the feet) to reduce any infections. Affected feet should be aired regularly. Also, changing the clothing once it is swat-soaked is a good option.
2. Use absorbent pads
Individuals with excessive sweating, especially in the armpits may benefit from using absorbent pads to prevent sweat from soaking through clothing.
3. Select proper footwear
For individuals with excessive sweating of feet, it is recommended to wear thick socks crafted from cotton or wool, regularly changing both socks and shoes. Optimal footwear options include leather, mesh, or canvas materials, while it is advisable to steer clear of synthetic materials.

Troubled with smelly feet? Know more about ways to manage it better.
Read this now

4. Maintain a sweat journal
Individuals who sweat a lot react to specific conditions. Heat, anxiety, and particular foods are a few common triggers that can cause excessive sweating. Finding out if you have triggers is crucial and they can be avoided to prevent sweating.
5. Focus on hydration
Excessive sweating can result in dehydration if fluids are not replenished. Therefore, maintaining adequate hydration is an important aspect of managing the condition and preventing its negative effects.

Listen to our experts talk about more benefits of drinking water.
Watch now

6. Stay calm and relaxed
Practicing relaxation techniques may assist individuals to cope with emotional stimuli that trigger sweating. Apart from this other psychological therapies that one can try include:

Psychotherapy: Hypnosis, psychotherapy, and biofeedback are only effective only in limited individuals. The treatment typically can lead to improvements in quality of life.
Behavioral therapy: These can help overcome anxiety benefitting individuals with anxiety-related sweating.

Tips for parents
Each child's experience with excessive sweating may vary, so it's essential to be patient, empathetic, and proactive in finding strategies that work best for your child's individual needs. Keep in mind the following things:

Talk openly with your child about excessive sweating to help them feel less self-conscious. 
Explain that it's a common condition and reassure them that they are not alone
Opt for lightweight, breathable fabrics such as cotton to help keep your child cool
Encourage your child to maintain good hygiene by showering regularly and using an antiperspirant or deodorant suitable for their age. 
Teach them proper skincare routines to prevent skin irritation
Ensure your child drinks enough water throughout the day
Pack an extra set of clothes, including socks, for your child to change into if needed in school. 
Provide them with sweat-absorbing pads or talcum powder to help manage excessive sweating.
Frequently Asked Questions
What can cause excessive sweating in children?
Can one use baby powder to stop sweat?
Can hyperhidrosis be cured?
What is the outlook for people with hyperhidrosis?
References
Brackenrich J, Fagg C. Hyperhidrosis. [Updated 2022 Oct 3]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-.
HYPERHIDROSIS: SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS. What are the signs and symptoms of hyperhidrosis? American Academy Of Dermatology.
Rystedt A, et al. Hyperhidrosis – an unknown widespread “silent” disorder .J Neurol Neuromedicine (2016) 1(4): 25-33.
Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) Hyperhidrosis: A Central Nervous Dysfunction of Sweat Secretion. (2023) 13:453–463.
Cheshire WP, Fealey RD. Drug-induced hyperhidrosis and hypohidrosis: incidence, prevention, and management. Drug Saf. 2008;31(2):109-126.
Davidson JR, Foa EB, Connor KM, Churchill LE. Hyperhidrosis in social anxiety disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2002;26(7-8):1327-1331.
Tugnoli V, Eleopra R, De Grandis D. Hyperhidrosis and sympathetic skin response in chronic alcoholic patients.
Schlereth T, Dieterich M, Birklein F. Hyperhidrosis--causes and treatment of enhanced sweating. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2009 Jan;106(3):32-7.
What is Excessive Sweating? Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis). National Health Institute (NHS UK). Jan 2021.
ARORA et al. J Cosmet Dermatol. Treatment of Axillary hyperhidrosis. 2022;21:62–70
Zeidabadi A, Yazdanpanahi Z, Dabbaghmanesh MH, Sasani MR, Emamghoreishi M, Akbarzadeh M. The effect of Salvia officinalis extract on symptoms of flushing, night sweat, sleep disorders, and score of forgetfulness in postmenopausal women. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020 Feb 28;9(2):1086-1092.
Mao JJ, Li QS, Soeller I, Rockwell K, Xie SX, Amsterdam JD. Long-Term Chamomile Therapy of Generalized Anxiety Disorder: A Study Protocol for a Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo- Controlled Trial. J Clin Trials. 2014 Nov;4(5):188.
Brackenrich J, Fagg C. Hyperhidrosis. [Updated 2022 Oct 3]. In: StatPearls [Internet].
Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-.
Fathizadeh H, Taghizadeh S, Safari R, Khiabani SS, Babak B, Hamzavi F, Ganbarov K, Esposito S, Zeinalzadeh E, Dao S, Köse Ş, Kafil HS. Study presence of COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) in the sweat of patients infected with Covid-19. Microb Pathog. 2020 Dec;149:104556.
Iannitti T, Palmieri B, Aspiro A, Di Cerbo A. A preliminary study of painless and effective transdermal botulinum toxin A delivery by jet nebulization for treatment of primary hyperhidrosis. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 Jul 14;8:931-5.
Hyperhidrosis: Tips For Managing. American Academy of Dermatology Association.


===============================================


