Hepatitis A
Overview

Hepatitis A is a contagious viral infection that is transmitted through the ingestion of food or water that is contaminated by human waste containing hepatitis A or close personal contact with an infected person. 

Hepatitis A is an acute, short-term illness that mainly targets the liver and causes symptoms like nausea, vomiting, fatigue, abdominal pain, poor appetite, fever, joint pain, itching, jaundice, dark yellow urine and grey or clay-colored stools.

Vaccination is key for long-term protection against the virus. Thorough handwashing, practising safe sex, and minimizing close personal contact with infected individuals reduce the risk of transmission of Hepatitis A.

There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A, as most cases resolve independently over 4-6 weeks. Supportive care, such as rest, hydration, and a healthy diet, is recommended. Alcohol and certain medications that can harm the liver should be avoided. 

Resolution of Hepatitis A infection results in cure and a life-long immunity to Hepatitis A. One can still get other types of viral hepatitis though.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Liver
Prevalence
Worldwide: 1.5 million
Mimicking Conditions
Alcoholic hepatitis
Other Viral hepatitis (B, C, D, E)
Autoimmune hepatitis
Necessary health tests/imaging
Medical history and physical examination
Blood tests: IgG, IgM, LFT
RT-PCR test
Treatment
Rest 
Adequate hydration
Proper nutrition
Regular monitoring
See All
Symptoms Of Hepatitis A 
  Hepatitis A is an acute, short-term viral infection that causes liver inflammation and damage. 

The symptoms of hepatitis A can vary from mild to severe and usually appear about two to six weeks after exposure to the virus. The majority of adults have symptoms while children seldom show any symptoms. Symptoms of hepatitis A may include the following:

Nausea
Vomiting
Fatigue
Malaise
Abdominal pain
Poor appetite
Fever
Itching
Joint pain
Dark yellow urine
Gray or clay-colored stools
Jaundice 

In mild cases, the infection may last about 4 to 6 weeks with more severe infections lasting about 6 months.
Unlike hepatitis B and C, hepatitis A does not cause chronic liver disease. However, very rarely  it can cause acute liver failure, which can be fatal.
Is Hepatitis A contagious?
Yes. An infected person is most contagious (able to spread the virus to others) during the 2 weeks, even before the appearance of any symptoms. One may continue to be contagious for up to 3 weeks after developing symptoms.
Causes Of Hepatitis A

The hepatitis A virus (HAV) usually spreads through the oral-fecal route i.e. through direct or indirect contact with an infected person’s stool. 

Here are some common ways in which hepatitis A can be spread:

1. Consuming contaminated water or food 
This virus is usually transmitted by consuming water, liquids or food contaminated with feces that contains the virus. This can occur in some of the following ways:

Drinking water from sources such as unprotected wells, boreholes, and standpipes contaminated by feces during transportation or supply
Food, drinks, and ice made from contaminated water
Cooking and eating in utensils washed in contaminated water
Raw fruit and vegetables that are irrigated with water containing human waste or rinsed with contaminated water
Seafood especially crustaceans and shellfish grown in contaminated water

2. Poor hand hygiene
If someone infected with hepatitis A doesn't wash their hands properly after using the bathroom, they can contaminate objects, surfaces, or food they touch. This can spread the virus to others who touch their mouth after touching the contaminated objects.

Optimum hand hygiene lays the foundation for preventing many diseases.
Explore our extensive range of hand wash and sanitizers to help achieve it.
Buy Now

2. Close personal contact with an infected person
Close, personal contact with an infected individual, such as through sexual contact (oral-anal sex), care for someone who is unwell, or sharing needles and drugs with others, can spread Hepatitis A. Infected people who use needles can spread the virus by sharing them or not disposing of them properly.

Hepatitis A is very contagious, and people can spread the infection even before they become ill.

3. Getting tattoos and body piercings from unregulated settings
Needlestick or instrument-related exposure to blood is more likely in unregulated settings. To minimize the risk of infection, it is advisable to get tattoos or body piercings done in regulated establishments.
Did you know?
You cannot get hepatitis A from casual contact like sitting near or touching an infected person. Additionally, a baby cannot get infected with hepatitis A via breast milk.
Risk Factors For Hepatitis A
  Anyone who has not been vaccinated or previously infected can get infected with the hepatitis A virus. The following individuals may be at a higher risk:

International travellers or individuals travelling to or living in regions with high hepatitis A prevalence.
Close personal contact or sex with an infected individual
Men who have sex with men (MSM)
Individuals using illicit drugs
Live with or take care on an infected individual
Live with or take care for a child recently adopted from a country where hepatitis A is common
Kids and teachers working in childcare centers or institutions
People experiencing homelessness or unstable housing
Individuals with chronic liver disease, including hepatitis B and hepatitis C 
Those infected with HIV
Personnel who work with primates
Diagnosis Of Hepatitis A
  Hepatitis A is typically diagnosed through a combination of medical history, physical examination, and laboratory tests.

Here are some common diagnostic methods used for hepatitis A:

1. Medical history and physical examination
Your doctor will ask you about your symptoms, recent travel and activities, and any potential exposure to the hepatitis A virus (HAV). They may also conduct a physical examination to assess your liver and overall health.

2. Blood tests
Blood tests are used to detect specific antibodies or viral components associated with hepatitis A. These tests include:

a. Hepatitis A IgM antibody test:  The body makes IgM antibodies after the first exposure to hepatitis A. They stay in the blood for about 3 to 6 months. This is a primary test that detects IgM antibodies produced in response to the hepatitis A virus. 

b. Hepatitis A IgG antibody test: This test checks for IgG antibodies, which indicate prior infection or vaccination against hepatitis A. It can help determine if you have had a past infection or have received vaccination.

c. Liver function tests: These tests measure the levels of certain enzymes and proteins in the blood that can indicate liver damage or inflammation. Elevated levels of liver enzymes, such as alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST), may suggest hepatitis A infection.

3. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) RT-PCR test
This is an additional test to detect the hepatitis A virus RNA and may require specialized laboratory facilities.
  Unsure of where to go for these tests? We are prepared to assist you.
Book lab tests with TATA 1mg
Click Here
Prevention Of Hepatitis A

To prevent the spread of hepatitis A infection, it is essential to follow these measures:

1. Get Vaccinated
The hepatitis A vaccine is highly effective in preventing the infection. It is recommended for
Children aged 12 to 23 months
Older children who have not received the vaccine
Travellers to areas with high hepatitis A prevalence
Men who have sex with men
Individuals with occupational risk exposure
Pregnant women at risk of severe hepatitis A
People with clotting factor disorders or chronic liver disease 
Those who use illegal drugs
Homeless or those people

Note: Standard adult dosing recommends the administration of two doses of the vaccine 6 to 12 months apart.

2. Maintain optimum hand hygiene
The spread of Hepatitis A can be prevented by following basic hand hygiene. It is advised to thoroughly wash the hands with soap and water:
After using the washroom
Before, during and after preparing food
Before and after eating food 
Before and after feeding your children
After changing your child’s diaper or washing their stools
After taking care of someone suffering from cholera

It is also important to avoid touching your face, mouth, or eyes with unwashed hands.

3. Ensure safe drinking water 
Drink only filtered or boiled water
Use filtered or boiled water to prepare food, brush teeth, and make ice
Avoid using water bottles without a seal
Store water in a clean and covered container

4. Cook and consume food vigilantly
Prepare food in filtered or boiled water
Wash fruits and vegetables with filtered or boiled water
Consume fruits and raw vegetables after peeling
Cook food thoroughly especially seafood such as shellfish which has the maximum chance of contamination.

5. Maintain cleanliness
Clean kitchen surfaces and utensils thoroughly with soap and water 
Use kitchen utensils and surfaces to cook food after drying
Wash clothes 30 meters away from drinking water sources
Disinfect any stool-contaminated surfaces with household bleach 

6. Improve Sanitation at the community level
Improving sanitation and sewage systems at a community level can help prevent the contamination of water sources and reduce the transmission of hepatitis A.

6. Practice safe sex
Hepatitis A can be transmitted through sexual contact, particularly anal-oral contact.
To reduce the risk:
Practice safe sex by using barrier methods, such as condoms, during sexual activity.
Limit the number of sexual partners and choose partners who have been vaccinated or are known to be free of hepatitis A infection.

Check out our extensive range of sexual wellness products.
Add to cart

7. Avoid the reuse of needles
Sharing contaminated needles is a major risk factor of Hepatitis transmission. This includes needles used for tattoos and body piercings as well. It is advisable to get tattoos or body piercings done by regulated establishments.

How to prevent Hepatitis A if one comes in close contact with an infected person?

1. Get Post-exposure prophylaxis 
If you have been in close contact with someone who has hepatitis A, your doctor may recommend post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP). PEP involves receiving a vaccine or immune globulin injection to prevent infection or reduce the severity of the illness.

2. Isolate yourself
To prevent transmission of the virus to others, it's advisable to limit contact with others until you are no longer contagious. Follow the recommendations of your doctor regarding isolation duration.
Does Hepatitis A vaccine provide protection against other forms of hepatitis?
No, the hepatitis A vaccine is specifically designed to protect against the hepatitis A virus and does not offer protection against other types of hepatitis, including hepatitis B or hepatitis C. Each form of hepatitis requires its own specific vaccine, so it is important to receive the appropriate vaccinations for comprehensive protection against all types of hepatitis. Want to know more about the ABC of hepatitis?
Click Here
Doctor To Visit

A general physician can investigate the causes of liver problems and refer patients for evaluation to the following specialists:
Gastroenterologist
Hepatologist

Gastroenterologists can diagnose and monitor Hepatitis A infection, assess liver function, and provide appropriate treatment options to manage symptoms and complications associated with the disease.

Hepatologists, who specialize in liver diseases, can offer comprehensive management of Hepatitis A, including the evaluation of liver damage, initiation of antiviral therapies if necessary, and long-term monitoring to ensure optimal liver health and recovery.

Here are some situations in which you should seek medical advice:
If you develop symptoms such as fatigue, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, jaundice etc. or if the symptoms get worse.
If you have been in close contact with someone who has hepatitis A 
If you have a doubt that you’ve been exposed to hepatitis A. 
If you are unsure about your vaccination status or need guidance on getting vaccinated to prevent hepatitis A.
If you have underlying liver disease or a weakened immune system

Connect with India’s best doctors online.
Consult Now
Treatment Of Hepatitis A

The treatment for hepatitis A typically focuses on supportive care, as the infection usually resolves on its own without specific medical intervention. The body's immune system clears the virus over time, usually within a few weeks to months. During this period, supportive care is recommended to relieve symptoms and promote recovery. 

Various supportive measures include:

Rest: Getting plenty of rest helps the body recover and conserve energy.

Fluids: Maintaining adequate hydration is important. Drinking water and electrolyte-rich fluids like oral rehydration solutions, coconut water can prevent dehydration, especially if there is vomiting or diarrhea. It is important to avoid alcohol during this time, as it can cause further liver damage.

Nutrition: Consuming a healthy, well- balanced wholesome diet supports liver function and overall recovery. Avoid any packaged, processed and junk food.

Read about the food items that must be included in the diet for a healthy liver
Click Here

Take medications with caution: Acetaminophen, paracetamol and medications against vomiting should be avoided. Medications that are metabolized by the liver should be approached cautiously, as the liver's function may be impaired. 

Regular monitoring of liver function: Regular monitoring of liver function through blood tests may be recommended to ensure proper recovery.

Note: Rarely (less than 5% of cases), liver failure can occur from hepatitis A. Immediate hospitalization and referral to a transplant center is critical for cases of HAV-associated fulminant liver failure.
Did you know?
Resolution of Hepatitis A infection results in cure and a life-long immunity to Hepatitis A. You can still get other types of viral hepatitis though.
Home-care For Hepatitis A
  The following herbal remedies have been traditionally used to improve liver’s health and function. However, it's important to take your doctor’s consent before initiating any of these herbal remedies for the management of Hepatitis A:

1. Turmeric (Haldi): Turmeric contains a compound called curcumin, which has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. It also aids in the removal of toxins from the body.
Turmeric can be cooked with meals, or taken alone, or consumed as turmeric tablets and liquid extract.

2. Hellebore (Kutaki): It is considered a potent liver tonic in Ayurveda. It has a profound cleansing influence on both the liver and promotes liver function.
It can be taken in powder, tablet or capsule form.

3. Jamun (Indian blackberry): Jamun possesses antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties that are helpful in reducing liver inflammation.
You can consume jamun as a fruit, fresh juice, powder, capsule or tablet form.

Click here to shop for jamun supplements
Fill your cart now

  4. Kalmegh: As per studies, the use of Kalmegh helped cure 80% of people with infectious hepatitis. The patients who took Kalmegh in the form of a decoction experienced a noticeable decrease in liver enzymes.

5. Ginger (Adrak): With its culinary versatility, ginger root is not only a flavorful ingredient but also a medicinal remedy for liver disease.
It possesses anti-inflammatory properties, safeguards against cellular damage, and provides potential support for liver health. 
It can be added while cooking food or consumed in the form of a tablet, capsule.

Explore our extensive range of ginger supplements
Buy Now


6. Triphala: Triphala is a powerful mixture that aids in regulating metabolism and promoting healthy bowel movements and liver function.
Triphala churna can be taken before bedtime to enhance overall wellness. It can be consumed as Triphala juice before having food.

Explore our Triphala herb care range
Click Here


7. Amla (Indian gooseberry): Amla is rich in antioxidants and is believed to have liver-protective properties. 
It can be consumed as fresh fruit. It also comes in different forms such as powder, tablet, capsule or candy.

Here is our Amla herbal supplement range
Buy Now


8. Green tea: It is loaded with antioxidants and its antiviral effects aid in fighting viral hepatitis.


Explore our wide range of green tea.
Fill your cart now


9. Milk thistle (doodh patra): It is A Mediterranean herb that acts as a potent liver cleanser. It aids in regenerating liver cells, minimizing damage, and eliminating toxins processed by the liver from the body. 
It can be taken in the form of a tablet, capsule or powdered form as recommended by the doctor.

Check out our extensive liver-care range.
Fill your cart now
Complications Of Hepatitis A

Hepatitis A (HAV)  is a viral infection that primarily affects the liver. While most cases of hepatitis A resolve on their own without causing long-term complications, in some instances, it can lead to complications such as:

1. Prolonged Cholestasis
Hepatitis A causes liver inflammation, which can disrupt bile flow and lead to disruption of bile flow for an extended period. This buildup of bile in the liver can cause jaundice, dark urine, pale stools, and itching. 

2. Relapsing hepatitis
The symptoms of Hepatitis A induced liver inflammation such as jaundice can reoccur periodically. However they are not chronic or long term.

3. Autoimmune hepatitis
Sometimes, hepatitis A can cause the immune system to mistakenly attack healthy liver cells, leading to autoimmune hepatitis. This condition involves chronic inflammation and can eventually lead to liver damage, scarring, cirrhosis, and liver failure.

4. Acute liver failure
Hepatitis A may cause liver failure in rare cases. It is more likely to occur in adults over the age of 50, those who are immunocompromised or have other liver illnesses. 

5. Acute renal failure
Hepatitis A, although primarily affecting the liver, can cause acute renal failure in rare cases. This condition occurs when the kidneys suddenly lose their ability to filter waste and regulate fluids, potentially leading to toxin buildup and imbalances. 
Alternative Therapies For Hepatitis A
  Here are some complementary and alternative therapies that can augment the conventional treatment and support overall well-being during the recovery phase of hepatitis A:

1. Acupuncture: It is a traditional Chinese medicine practice that can provide relief for chronic pain, such as low-back pain, neck pain, and knee pain, which are commonly experienced by individuals with hepatitis A.

2. Meditation: It is a mindfulness practice that can boost overall immunity and faster recovery.

3. Tai chi: It appears to help improve balance and stability. Additionally, tai chi can alleviate back pain and knee pain, common symptoms experienced by those with hepatitis A.

4. Yoga: It is an ancient practice that combines physical postures, breathing exercises, and meditation, can be beneficial for individuals with hepatitis A. Yoga helps relieve stress, supports healthy habits, and improves mental and emotional well-being.

5. Relaxation techniques: Deep breathing exercises help individuals relax, reduce stress, and promote a sense of calmness. Guided imagery also helps create positive mental images to reduce anxiety and induce relaxation. These techniques can be used as self-care strategies to alleviate symptoms and enhance overall well-being in individuals with hepatitis A.
Living With Hepatitis A

Hepatitis A viral infection is typically a self-limiting disease that resolves on its own without causing long-term complications, it can still have an impact on a person's quality of life during the acute phase. 

Here are some ways in which hepatitis A can affect the quality of life and strategies to cope with them:

1. Physical symptoms
Hepatitis A can cause physical symptoms like fatigue, nausea, abdominal pain, jaundice, loss of appetite, and muscle aches. These symptoms can disrupt daily activities and lower energy levels. 
Coping strategies include getting enough rest, eating well, staying hydrated, and following your doctor's recommendations, which may include medications to relieve specific symptoms.

2. Emotional impact
Hepatitis A can cause emotional distress, including anxiety and worry about the disease's impact on personal and professional life. 
Seeking support from friends, family, or mental health professionals can provide emotional support and help manage anxiety and stress.

3. Social isolation
Hepatitis A may cause social isolation due to the need to avoid spreading the infection. 
While it is necessary to limit close contact with others, you can stay connected through phone calls, video chats, and social media. 
Communicate your situation to close contacts to maintain social interactions and prevent misunderstandings.

4. Impact on work and school
Hepatitis A may necessitate time off from work or school, impacting productivity, finances, and education. Communicate with employers or school administrators, who may provide accommodations or flexible arrangements to manage workload and makeup missed studies.
Frequently Asked Questions
How soon after exposure to Hepatitis A will symptoms appear?
When should a child receive the Hepatitis A Vaccination?
How are hepatitis A, B and C different from each other?
Are there any side effects of a Hepatitis A vaccine reaction?
What should you do if you miss the vaccination?
If I Have Had Hepatitis A in the Past, Can I Get It Again?
References
Iorio N, John S. Hepatitis A. [Updated 2022 Jul 4]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-. Available from:
Raval, P. R., & Raval, R. M. (2016). Treatment of infective hepatitis: Where biomedicine has no answers, Ayurveda has!!. Ancient science of life, 35(3), 176–179. Available from:
Complementary, alternative, or Integrative Health: What’s in a name? [Internet]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Hepatitis A [Internet]. World Health Organization; [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Hepatitis A - NIDDK [Internet]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Hepatitis A vaccine information statement [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2021 [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Raval PR, Raval RM. Treatment of infective hepatitis: Where biomedicine has no answers, ayurveda has!! [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2016 [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Murray MT. glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, editors. [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2020 [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Sahebkar A. Potential efficacy of ginger as a natural supplement for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2011 [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
Wang Y, Wang R, Wang Y, Peng R, Wu Y, Yuan Y. Ginkgo biloba extract mitigates liver fibrosis and apoptosis by regulating p38 MAPK, NF-ΚB/IκBα, and Bcl-2/Bax Signaling [Internet]. U.S. National Library of Medicine; 2015 [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:
VIRAL HEPATITIS, Information for Gay and Bisexual Men [Internet]. [cited 2023 Jul 6]. Available from:


===============================================


