Dental pain
Also known as Toothache, Odontogenic Pain, Tooth Pain
Overview
Most of us might have experienced toothache at least once in our lifetime. A toothache or dental pain is any pain that originates from the tooth and its surrounding structures such as the gums.The intensity of pain may range from mild dull aching to severe excruciating pain.

Toothache can occur from various dental causes like tooth cavity, tooth fracture, broken old fillings, gum infections, grinding of teeth etc. Rarely, pain is experienced in teeth because of non dental causes like sinusitis, heart attack, lockjaw, trigeminal neuralgia etc. Therefore, it is important to differentiate dental pain from such conditions that cause referred pain in the teeth.

Dental pain can happen at any age, but it is more common in school going children or the elderly population. Following good oral hygiene practices is one of the simple yet effective ways to keep teeth and gums healthy and prevent dental pain. In case when dental pain is experienced, painkillers and some home remedies might provide temporary relief but a dental consultation followed by required dental procedures are highly recommended.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children below 15 years of age 
Adults above 65 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Teeth
Gums
Prevalence
Worldwide: 9.4% (2015)


Mimicking Conditions
Sinusitis
Migraine
Otalgia or ear pain
Trigeminal neuralgia
Post-traumatic neuropathy
Temporomandibular joint disorder
Orofacial neurovascular pain
Cardiac pain
Necessary health tests/imaging
Tooth X-Ray
X-Ray TM joints
CBCT
Complete blood count (CBC)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Diabetes screening
Treatment
Pain releivers: NSAIDs, opoids & antyi sensitivity toothpastes
Antibiotics
Mouthwashes
Dental procedures: Scaling & planing, cavity filling, root canal treatment & tooth extraction
See All
Symptoms Of Dental Pain

Dental pain can vary in intensity from mild to severe. It can also range from dull-aching pain to sharp-shooting pain based on the causative factors. A range of symptoms can be seen with dental pain such as:
Dull-aching toothache that may radiate to the gums or jaws.
Pain that worsens while biting or chewing food.
Pain exacerbated by excessively hot or cold foods or sweets.
Pain accompanied by bleeding or discharge from the gums.
Swelling of the gums or face, which may be accompanied by a fever.
Occasionally, a bad mouth odor and bad taste in the mouth may be present, along with toothache.
Causes Of Dental Pain

There can be multiple causes of dental pain such as:
Fracture of the tooth
Dental caries or tooth decay that cause cavities and infection in the tooth
Periodontal or gum infections
A dental abscess, i.e., a collection of pus or fluid near the tooth, which occurs in tooth infections
Erosion of tooth enamel and gum recession
Lack of space for eruption of wisdom teeth
Accumulation of food particles and debris between the teeth
Repetitive clenching or grinding of teeth
Loose or fractured old filling or a cracked tooth cap
Ill-fitted dentures or braces
Risk Factors For Dental Pain

Dental pain is most commonly seen in children and adolescents, with a prevalence rate ranging around 9.4%. It is more common in the lower socio-economic population who have limited access to quality healthcare. Dental pain is also common in the elderly population and is the primary reason for dental procedures in the elderly population.
  Additionally, the risk of dental problems is more often associated with the following:
Poor oral hygiene
Excessive consumption of sweets, starchy or acidic food and drinks
Smoking
Diabetes
Weak immune system due to certain medications (such as chemotherapy for cancer) or certain diseases (such as HIV)
Xerostomia or dry mouth due to inadequate salivation which can happen after injury to head or neck, after radiation therapy or as side effect of certain drugs
Heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) can cause stomach acid to flow into the mouth, leading to dissolution of enamel and thereby causing tooth damage.
Eating disorders like Anorexia and Bulimia can lead to wearing of teeth and cavities. They also affect production of saliva.
Many parents are in a dilemma about their child’s dental care. They know they don’t want their kid to get cavities but don’t know how to go about preventing them. Here are some tips to ensure your toddler gets proper tooth care.
Click Here To Know More!

Diagnosis Of Dental Pain

When you visit your dentist for dental pain, they will perform a thorough oral examination and get a detailed history of symptoms. 

Some of the common tests used to diagnose dental pain include:
A tooth percussion test is done by gently tapping the tooth with the end of mouth mirror to check the response.
To perform a tooth mobility test, the dentist carefully tries to move your tooth to check whether it is loose. 
A tooth sensitivity test involves checking the response of the tooth to hot or cold stimuli. 

Additional investigations may be needed to evaluate the condition further which include imaging studies and lab tests.

Imaging studies: Dental X-Ray and X-Ray TM Joints help visualize the teeth and jaws to know what abnormalities may potentially be causing the pain. A detailed visualization is possible with CBCT (Cone Beam Computed Tomography). This method is used when individual x-rays of teeth alone are unable to identify the cause of dental pain.

Laboratory tests: Sometimes, lab tests such as complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and diabetes screening may help diagnosis in treatment planning.
Celebs affected
Ray J
Celebrity rapper Ray J complained of toothaches while filming the reality show ‘Celebrity Big Brother’. He was hospitalized and diagnosed with an abscessed tooth, cracked filling in another tooth, and gum disease.
Ariana Grande
American singer Ariana Grande has undergone extraction of three wisdom teeth that were causing unbearable pain.
Prevention Of Dental Pain

Since most of the toothaches occur due to poor oral hygiene, good dental hygiene practices can mostly prevent dental pain. You can keep your teeth and gums healthy by-
Brushing gently with fluoride-containing toothpaste at least twice a day
Flossing regularly to clean the spaces between the teeth
Rinsing and gargling after meals to prevent lodging of food particles and debris between the teeth
Avoiding excessive sugar, starch or acidic food and beverages in your diet
Reducing consumption of sticky foods like caramel or chocolate that get stuck in grooves and pits of teeth for a long duration
When consuming sweet foods, it is better to consume them with the meal rather than as a snack.
Avoiding frequent snacking. When you eat or drink beverages other than water,bacteria in the mouth create acids that can dissolve tooth enamel. Frequent snacking throughout the day can keep your teeth under constant attack.
Avoiding extremely hot or cold foods if you have sensitivity issues
Avoiding chewing on very hard foods like ice or sugarcane that can cause tooth fractures. Using teeth for opening food packets or cracking open nutshells can also increase the chances of a tooth fracture.
Regular appointments with the dentist for professional cleaning of teeth and examinations.
Application of dental sealants or protective coatings on teeth and fluoride treatment if advised by the dentist.
Brushing twice is good but brushing right is the key
Brushing your teeth twice a day is important, but it is NOT enough to start your day on a healthy note. It is equally important to brush your teeth THE RIGHT WAY as it helps to destroy harmful bacteria present in the mouth along with cleaning the teeth and gums effectively. But do you know what is the right way to brush your teeth, if you do then are you following the steps regularly? Well, before you answer this question, read the article.
Read Article Here!
Specialist To Visit 

Toothaches can be very uncomfortable but the pain isn’t permanent as long as it’s treated. Your dentist can relieve your pain and prevent any infections from spreading. It is not advised to delay your visit to the dentist as cavities can get worse over time.

It is necessary to seek dental or medical care if you have:
Toothache that lasts more than 2 days
Toothache that is severe and persistent in nature
Pain that does not go away after taking painkillers
Fractured or broken tooth
Extreme tooth sensitivity 
Swelling around the tooth, in the jaw or face
Bad odor or foul taste in the mouth
Toothache accompanied by fever and chills
Earache or pain when you open your mouth wide
Trouble swallowing or excessive pain or bleeding from gums
A facial rash associated with a toothache
Recent head or face injury in addition to dental injury

Doctors/specialists who can help you to diagnose and treat dental problems or any other associated medical issues are:
Dentist
General physician
Consult India’s best doctor online from the comfort of your home.
Consult Now!

Treatment Of Dental Pain

The treatment for dental pain is broadly divided into providing pain relief and treating the underlying cause.

1. Medicines for dental pain relief
NSAID painkillers are prescribed to provide relief from mild to moderate dental pain.
Opioid painkillers or combination medicines are prescribed to treat severe dental pain.
Anti sensitivity toothpastes can provide some relief from sensitivity of teeth.

2. Treatment of underlying cause
Antibiotics are prescribed by dentists to treat dental infections
Mouthwashes are also recommended to combat infections

3. Dental procedures 
These procedures can be advised if needed and may include:
Scaling and planing- In case of plaque accumulation and gum infection,the dentist may carry out professional cleaning or scaling of teeth or numb the gums to remove plaque buildup below the gum line.
Cavity filling - For a shallow cavity in the tooth, the dentist will remove the decay and seal the tooth with a filling.
Root canal treatment (RCT) - In case of a deep cavity that infects the pulp of the tooth, the dentist will perform a root canal treatment. In this procedure, all the vital contents of the tooth (nerves and blood vessels) are removed and the root canal system is sealed with an inert filling material. RCT is usually followed by a dental cap or crown.
Tooth extraction - If the tooth is badly damaged and cannot be saved, it may be advised to get it extracted.
Home-care For Dental Pain

If you have mild dental pain, home remedies may provide considerable relief. Home remedies are also useful in alleviating symptoms of severe disease. You can do the following at home to help ease dental pain:
For many people, rinsing the mouth with lukewarm saline water is an effective first-line treatment. Saline water is a natural disinfectant, which helps in reducing inflammation and ease any pain or swelling.You can mix 1/2 teaspoon of salt in a glass of lukewarm water and use it as a mouthwash.
Applying an ice pack or cold compress externally can help reduce inflammation and swelling and thereby give some relief in pain.
Avoid eating foods that are hard to chew. Do not chew on the painful side.
You can apply clove oil or peppermint oil to the affected area. It is known to help with pain relief from toothaches.
Do not consume excessively hot or cold foods or sweets as these may worsen the sensitivity and increase your pain.
Gently brush your teeth at least twice a day. Rinse and gargle after every meal to avoid food particles from getting stuck in between the teeth.
Complications Of Dental Pain

A toothache on its own does not cause any severe complications and in most cases, tooth infections can be easily treated.

Sometimes, tooth infection can cause an abscess in which pus is collected inside the tooth or gums. In very rare cases, delay in treatment can cause this infection to spread to other areas of the body resulting in any of the following complications:
Sinusitis: can occur rarely from untreated upper teeth infection
Osteomyelitis: Infection of the bone surrounding the tooth
Ludwig angina: Submandibular space infection
Cavernous sinus thrombosis: Infection of the blood vessels within the sinuses
Cellulitis: An infection of the skin and fat directly beneath the skin
Parapharyngeal abscess: An abscess at the back of the mouth
Septicemia: Medical condition in which the immune system overreacts to an infection in the blood
These conditions can be life threatening and require immediate attention and intervention.
The following signs and symptoms may indicate any possible spread of infection to other parts of the body:
High fever
Chills
Swelling of the face or the jaw
Foul-smelling discharge from the tooth
Nausea
Vomiting
Severe headache
Itching or burning sensation on the skin
Drooping eyelids
Double vision
Confusion 
Alternative Therapies For Dental Pain

1. Ayurveda: Dental or oral health is called ‘Danta Swasthya’ in Ayurveda. There are various Ayurvedic practices which can be opted for good oral health, such as:
Chewing sticks of medicinal trees, like Neem, Meswak, etc., are used as an alternative to conventional brushing techniques. While chewing these sticks, the medicinal extracts get released into the mouth, which helps promote and maintain healthy teeth and gums.
Oil pulling is an ancient practice that involves swishing oils inside the mouth. Sunflower oil, sesame oil, or coconut oil is used for oil pulling. This has been used as a traditional remedy to prevent teeth and gum diseases.
Medicinal condiments and herbs like clove, garlic, vanilla extract, peppermint, wheatgrass, thyme are found to be useful in relieving dental pain and are famously used as home remedies to treat toothaches.

2. Homeopathy: Homeopathy is an alternative form of medicine that follows the principle of ‘like kills like’. Homeopathy doctors prescribe diluted tinctures that elicit symptoms similar to those the patient is already experiencing. 
Tinctures of Belladonna and Arnica Montana are found to be useful in relieving toothaches. 
Calcarea carbonica, Chamomilla, Antimonium crudum, etc., are also helpful in relieving dental pain. 
Arsenicum album is effective in treating gum diseases, such as bleeding gums.
You can prevent tooth pain by following basic oral hygiene such as brushing and flossing your teeth twice a day and regularly visiting your dentist’s clinic. However, if you are suffering from a toothache, then you can try these simple home remedies to get some relief in pain naturally.
Click Here!

Living With Dental Pain

Dental Pain or Toothache is one of the commonest pain experienced by patients worldwide. It’s normal to occasionally battle with tooth pain because of sensitive teeth, gums infections or dental cavities. Though good and consistent oral hygiene measures help in preventing a lot of dental problems, sometimes, as much as one tries to brush twice a day, floss every day, and eat a healthy diet, one can still suffer from dental issues. For eg. Some may be genetically predisposed to have more brittle,sensitive teeth or more acidic saliva. Unfortunately, some can suffer from any form of accident resulting in fracture of teeth and thereby resulting in dental pain.

Dental pain can come with a lot of annoyance and irritation. Continuous pain can lead to avoidance of food and thereby causing nutritional deficiencies or weight loss. Due to heightened dental sensitivity patients may not be able to enjoy their favorite sweets or ice-cream. Another cause of concern in patients with dental infections is bad breath or foul odor coming from the mouth. This can lead to extreme social embarrassment or isolation.

Prevention of a disease is always better than its cure. Good oral hygiene practices and routine visits to the dentist are essential to keep the teeth and gums healthy life-long. In cases where dental problems happen in spite of taking precautions, one should not be disheartened as most dental problems are easily treatable and have a good outlook. Home remedies and a prompt visit to the dentist without much delay can go a long way in getting relief from toothache.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the sensitivity of teeth and what does it feel like?
My child broke half his tooth while playing. What should I do?
What are some home remedies for instant pain relief from toothache?
Can a toothache be cured at home or I need to visit a dentist?
Why is my toothache so severe?
References
Renton T. Dental (Odontogenic) Pain. Rev Pain. 2011 Mar;5(1):2-7
Slade GD. Epidemiology of dental pain and dental caries among children and adolescents. Community Dent Health. 2001 Dec;18(4):219-27.
Wetherell J, Richards L, Sambrook P, Townsend G. Management of acute dental pain: a practical approach for primary health care providers. Aust Prescr 2001;24:144-8.
Toothache. NHS UK
Singh A, Purohit B. Tooth brushing, oil pulling and tissue regeneration: A review of holistic approaches to oral health. J Ayurveda Integr Med. 2011 Apr;2(2):64-8.
Newadkar UR, Chaudhari L, Khalekar YK. Homeopathy in Dentistry: Is There a Role? Pharmacognosy Res. 2016 Jul-Sep;8(3):217.
Clementino MA, Gomes MC, Pinto-Sarmento TC, et al. Perceived Impact of Dental Pain on the Quality of Life of Preschool Children and Their Families. PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130602.
Gleissner C. Welchen Einfluss hat das Geschlecht auf die Mundgesundheit? [How does gender influence oral health?]. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2014 Sep;57(9):1099-106. German.


===============================================


