Vaginal discharge
Also known as Leucorrhoea, Leukorrhea, Fluor albus.
Overview

Discharge from the vagina is a natural and normal process that helps to keep your reproductive tract clean, lubricated and healthy, warding off any infection. 

The normal discharge is usually thin, clear or whitish to light yellowish and does not have any foul smell. It usually becomes more slippery and has the consistency of egg whites during ovulation. The amount and thickness of normal discharge can also increase during sexual arousal, pregnancy and the use of oral contraceptives.

Any changes in color, consistency, volume, and/or odor could signal an abnormal discharge. This abnormal discharge along with symptoms like itching, pelvic pain, or burning sensation while urination etc can be a vaginal infection that needs immediate attention. 

Vaginal infections can be prevented by following good feminine hygiene, wearing breathable cotton undergarments, and a few healthy lifestyle changes. Treatment differs depending on the cause of the infection. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Menstruating females
Body part(s) involved
Vagina, Cervix, Ovaries, Fallopian tubes
Mimicking Conditions
Herpes simplex virus infection
Cervicitis
Bacterial vaginosis
Candidiasis or yeast (fungal) infection
Trichomoniasis
Gonorrhea 
Chlamydia
Necessary health tests/imaging
Laboratory tests: Examination of vaginal fluid, Absolute leukocyte count, Genital PAP smear and Molecular tests
Treatment
Antibiotics: Cefixime, Ceftriaxone, Ciprofloxacin, & Ofloxacin
Antifungal: Miconazole, Terconazole, & Fluconazole
Antiprotozoal: Tinidazole and Metronidazole
Specialists to consult
General physician
Gynecologist
Types of Vaginal Discharge
  Vaginal discharge is broadly divided into:
A. Normal (Physiological) vaginal discharge

Vaginal discharge is a natural and normal process that helps to keep your reproductive tract clean, lubricated and healthy, warding off any infection. 
The amount, color and consistency of normal vaginal discharge can vary from person to person and where you are in your menstrual cycle:

Days 1–5: During your period or menstruation, the discharge is red and bloody.
Days 6–14: Following a period, vaginal discharge is mostly white or slightly yellow, and sticky.
Days 14–25: A few days before ovulation, the discharge becomes clear, thin, slippery and stretchy, similar to the consistency of egg whites. After ovulation, the discharge goes back to being white or light yellow, and sticky.
Days 25–28: The amount of discharge reduces before the next period.

B. Inflammatory vaginal discharge

This type of leucorrhoea occurs when there is inflammation (redness and swelling) in the vagina caused by microbes.
Various types of vaginal discharge vary in color, amount, consistency, and smell. Some are normal, while others are an indication of an infection that warrants consultation with a doctor. Here you can get an idea of what different discharge can mean:

1. Clear to whitish
Watery, clear to whitish vaginal discharge is normal. It usually becomes more slippery and has the consistency of egg whites during ovulation. The amount and thickness of vaginal discharge can also increase during sexual arousal, pregnancy and the use of oral contraceptives.

2. White to cream or light yellow
White to cream or light yellow discharge is mostly a sign of healthy lubrication. However, if the white discharge has a frothy consistency like cottage cheese and is accompanied by a strong smell, it may indicate a yeast/fungal/candida infection, which can also cause severe itching or irritation.

3. Red 
Red discharge occurs during a period or menstruation. However, if bleeding occurs between menstrual periods or after menopause you should consult a doctor on priority.

4. Pinkish to light brown
Pink to light brown discharge mostly occurs as spotting before a period. It can also be a sign of implantation bleeding during early pregnancy. Some pink discharge can be seen after sex if intercourse has caused tears or irritation in the vagina or cervix.

6. Yellow to green
While light yellow discharge may not indicate any illness, darker yellow to green discharge could indicate sexually transmitted infections. Sometimes, the discharge may smell fishy accompanied by itching or burning in or around the vagina.

7. Gray
When you have a gray color discharge with symptoms like pain in the pelvic region or pain while peeing and discomfort or itching around the genital area, it could be a sign of infection called bacterial vaginosis.
Did you know?
During pregnancy, vaginal discharge may become more noticeable. It helps to prevent any infections traveling up from the vagina to the womb. The discharge is heaviest towards the end of pregnancy and may contain streaks of thick, sticky, pink mucus, called ‘show’, an early sign of labor.
Causes of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

1. Bacterial vaginosis
It is a common bacterial infection that occurs when the balance of bacteria in the vagina is altered. It can cause a grayish discharge accompanied by an intense fishy odor. It may also cause itching, redness, and swelling of the entire vaginal area. 

Women who have several sex partners, or those who use a contraceptive intrauterine device, such as copper-T, are more likely to get bacterial vaginosis.

2. Candidiasis or yeast (fungal) infection
A vaginal infection that is caused by a yeast known as candida is called candidiasis. It is commonly seen in women who are taking contraceptive pills or certain antibiotics, or have conditions, such as diabetes and weakened immunity. The main symptoms are intense itching along with a thick white discharge that appears like cottage cheese. 

3. Trichomoniasis
This vaginal infection is caused by the protozoa trichomonas vaginalis. It can cause a greenish-yellow, sometimes frothy, discharge and pain during urination. This infection is usually transmitted through unprotected sex.

4. Gonorrhea and chlamydia
These are sexually transmitted infections that produce abnormal discharges by affecting the cervix. Women may experience greenish or cloudy discharge, bleeding during or after sex, and abdominal pain.

Safeguard yourself from STDs by using the right protection. Shop from our wide range of contraceptives.
Explore Here
Symptoms of Abnormal vaginal discharge

Abnormal vaginal discharge is marked by change in color, consistency, volume, and/or odor. Other symptoms that might accompany abnormal vaginal discharge are:
Itching or irritation in vaginal area
Pain or discomfort in pelvic area
Redness around the vaginal opening
Strong foul smell from discharge
Burning sensation or pain while urinating
Spotting after sexual intercourse 
Pain during or after sexual intercourse
Flu-like symptoms including headache and fever
Fatigue or tiredness
Unexplained weight loss
Lower back pain
Constipation
Risk Factors of Vaginal Discharge

1. Non-infectious causes
Puberty 
Menstrual cycle 
Ovulation
Sexual arousal
Pregnancy
Menopause
Contraceptive device or birth control pills
2. Infectious causes
Poor feminine hygiene like not changing pads/tampons regularly
Douching, use of chemical or perfumed soaps
Weakened immune system
Uncontrolled diabetes
Certain medications, such as steroids or antibiotics
Unprotected sex with an infected partner
History of STDs like gonorrhea, trichomoniasis, and syphilis in the past
Use of public or unclean toilets
Low socio-economic status
Diagnosis of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

Not every vaginal discharge is alarming but if you experience any unusual discharge marked by change in color, consistency, volume, and/or odor, see a doctor on priority. Diagnosis includes:
  1. Medical history 
Your doctor may ask you about your medical history including the medicines you've been taking during the past few weeks. The doctor will also discuss your symptoms, the severity of the symptoms, and the time duration of symptoms.
  2. Physical examination
Your doctor will perform a pelvic exam to look for the type of vaginal discharge. A sample of discharge might be taken for relevant testing.

3. Laboratory tests
Examination of vaginal fluid: The vaginal discharge is placed under a microscope to determine the type of bacteria, yeast, or protozoa causing the vaginal infection. Identifying the cause helps the doctor prescribe targeted treatment.

Absolute leukocyte count: Also known as WBC count, it also helps examine the vaginal fluid for white blood cells (WBCs), an indicator of any infection. 

Genital PAP smear: Your doctor may perform a Pap smear by taking a sample of the cells from the cervix. The sample is then sent to the lab to be examined under the microscope for any cell changes.

Want to learn more about Pap smear tests? 
Click to read

Molecular tests: Sometimes specific tests are required for the diagnosis of STDs causing abnormal vaginal discharge. The standard test is the nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), and it is generally used for the diagnosis of gonorrhea and chlamydia. This method detects and identifies the genetic materials of bacteria and other pathogens. 
Prevention of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

1. Maintain personal hygiene
Keep your private parts clean using lukewarm water. 
Always pat the private parts dry after urinating using toilet paper or a soft cloth.
Wipe the right way. Always make sure to clean your private parts from front to back, and not from back to front.
Avoid harsh soaps, scented feminine hygiene products, douching and bubble baths. These can rob the vagina of good bacteria, leading to the overgrowth of bad bacteria.
Make a habit of washing and drying your hands before touching the vaginal area.

Up your hygiene game with our widest range of feminine hygiene products to meet all your needs.
Shop Now

2. Be mindful of your sanitary products
If you are prone to vaginal infections, avoid using scented tampons and menstrual cups. Prefer sanitary pads and liners.
During your period, changing your pad every 3-4 hours is good hygiene and prevents bad odors.
If you use panty liners, make sure to change them regularly. 

Confused about which sanitary products to use?
Here is what you need to know about the different products available.
Click to Read

3. Pay attention to your clothing
Wear cotton or cotton-lined undergarments as they absorb moisture and prevent sweat accumulation.
Wear loose-fitting leggings, tights, and pants. They help in free flow of air.
Avoid sitting around in damp or sweaty clothing as it can lead to vaginal and skin infections.
Change your workout clothes immediately after exercising.
Clean your underwear with a good quality detergent that has bactericidal and fungicidal properties.

4. Practice safe sex
Safe sexual practices are paramount to reduce the risk of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and vaginal infections.

Check out our extensive range of contraceptives
Fill your cart now
Always urinate and gently wash the area around your vagina every time after indulging in sex.

5. Maintain a healthy lifestyle
Drink at least 8 glasses of water every day to wash out the toxic substances from the body.
Eat a well-balanced wholesome diet rich in fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, healthy fats, and protein.
Limit sugar, processed, and packaged foods in your diet.
Exercise regularly and get enough sleep.
Learn to manage your stress effectively.
Limit the consumption of alcohol 
Quit smoking.

Want to stop smoking?
Our smoking cessation range can help you get rid of this deadly habit.
Explore now
Specialist To Visit

Doctors that can help with the diagnosis and treatment of vaginal discharge include:
General physician
Gynecologist 

A general physician can evaluate the symptoms of vaginal infection and start the treatment. They can refer to a specialist for further assessment. A gynecologist is a specialist in diagnosing and treating diseases that affect the female reproductive system.

Consult our team of trusted doctors.
Book your consultation now
Treatment of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

Treatment of abnormal vaginal discharge depends on the severity of the symptoms, age, and other factors, such as the underlying causes. It may be caused by STDs; therefore, treating the causative agent is important to stop its recurrence. Management includes:

Medications-

1. For bacterial infections: If bacterial vaginosis is causing vaginal discharge, the following antibiotics are usually prescribed for its management: 
Metronidazole
Clindamycin
Ceftriaxone 
Doxycycline 
Azithromycin 
Ofloxacin
Gemifloxacin
Gentamicin

2. For fungal infections: In case of vaginal yeast infections, antifungal medicines are prescribed, such as:
Miconazole
Terconazole
Fluconazole

3. For protozoa infection: For protozoa infections, such as trichomoniasis, the doctor may prescribe drugs like:
Tinidazole
Metronidazole

Note: These medicines are available in the form of creams, ointments, or tablets. The doctor may instruct you on the route of administration of the medicine which depends on the severity and prolongation of the abnormal vaginal discharge.

Ordering medicines has never been easy. Get medications delivered to your home with ease of a click.
Click and Shop!


Watch this video to understand the types of vaginal discharge, their prevention and effective treatment.

Home care for Vaginal Discharge

The following home remedies help in improving the vaginal microbiome and can be an adjunct to conventional treatment:

Lady Finger (Bhindi): You can boil the ladyfingers in water or use them as the main ingredient of your soup. You can also soak ladyfingers with yogurt which is a natural probiotic. Consumption of this mixture will inhibit the growth of bacteria in the vaginal area.

Coriander seeds (Dhania): Soak a teaspoon of coriander seeds in water for the whole night and strain it the next morning. Drink this solution early in the morning on an empty stomach to help relieve vaginal discharge.

Yogurt (Dahi): Yogurt is rich in probiotics. Having yogurt in your daily meals can improve the gut microbiome and helps reduce vaginal infections.

Basil (Tulsi): It is a wonderful herb with many antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and anti-allergic properties. You can prepare tulsi tea by boiling a few leaves with a glass of water. Drink this twice daily as it will help to relieve the symptoms of vaginal discharge.

Indian gooseberry (Amla): Amla is rich in vitamin C and has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and antibiotic properties. Consuming amla or its juice enhances immunity. For the treatment of vaginal discharge, take one teaspoonful of amla powder with a glass of water once daily. 

Aloe vera: Aloe vera has multiple medicinal uses. Its consumption is useful for managing excessive discharge, itching, and burning sensation. 
Fenugreek (Methi): Consuming the fenugreek seeds decoction or one teaspoonful with a glass of water balances the pH level in the vagina.

Cumin (Jeera): Cumin seeds decoction is beneficial in reducing itching and  discharge.
Complications of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

Abnormal white discharge is a sign of vaginal infections. These vaginal infections can cause several complications such as: 
  1. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID): Vaginal infections due to bacteria, yeast, virus, or STDs can spread from the vagina to other reproductive organs of females, such as the fallopian tubes, ovaries, & uterus.
The symptoms of PID include chills, fatigue, fever, & abdominal pain, and can lead to reproductive complications, such as: 
 Dysmenorrhea (painful periods)
 Chronic pelvic pain
 Internal abscesses (collection of pus due to infection)
 Endometritis (inflammation and infection of the uterus)
 Ectopic pregnancy (attachment of the egg outside the uterus)

2. Infertility: If untreated for a long time, abnormal discharge may affect the chances of a woman getting pregnant.
 Did you know?
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including gonorrhea and chlamydia can affect fertility in women. Know more about what causes infertility in women and how it can be treated.
Read now:
Alternative Therapies of Abnormal Vaginal Discharge

Alternative therapies can provide relief to a certain extent, however, always seek advice from your doctor before trying these. Some of the complementary therapies that have proven to be beneficial include: 

1. Essential oils
Essential oils like tea tree oil and lavender oil have antibacterial and antifungal effects and have shown promise in the management of vaginal discharge caused by yeast or fungi.

Explore our wide range of essential oils.
Click to Shop

2. Traditional Chinese medicine
A traditional chinese medicine expert will prescribe chinese oral medicines depending on the severity of the disease for correcting the body’s imbalances. Studies have shown that TCM can be effective in treating excessive vaginal discharge or itching.
Living With Vaginal Discharge

Clear to white light yellow vaginal discharge is normal but its color, texture, and quantity can differ from person to person depending on their age. However, consult your doctor if you feel that it's abnormal and you are getting a heavy discharge frequently with changes in odor, color, and texture.

Though abnormal vaginal discharge can be managed with medications depending on the cause, a few important points to be kept in mind are:

During heavy discharge, use panty liners as they are meant to be used during non-period days.
Keep changing your pad at least every 4 to 8 hours during periods.
Regular health checkup is important to evaluate the presence of any infection and whether the female is receiving the right treatment which helps in clearing the infection or not.
Hormonal changes due to puberty, pregnancy, and menopause can cause heavy vaginal discharges. Always inform or discuss any changes you experienced while or before the treatment with your doctor.
Routine test to evaluate blood sugar level is required in case of yeast infection, as yeast overgrows in elevated sugar levels.

Watch our expert discuss vaginal discharge in detail. 
Frequently Asked Questions
Is it normal to have a vaginal discharge?
When does normal vaginal discharge increase?
How do I keep my vagina clean?
What kind of vaginal discharge is not good?
Can abnormal vaginal discharge cause any complications?
References
Arthy, A. & Sen, Sangeeta & Arumugam, GaneshKumar & Rajaram, Rajendran & Archunan, G.. (2021). An evaluation of the prevalence, cause and risk factors associated with Vaginal Discharge in reproductive age group women. International Journal of Reproduction, Contraception, Obstetrics and Gynecology. 10. 1520. 10.18203/2320-1770.ijrcog20211131.
Chaudhry V et al. National Journal of Community Medicine│Volume 3│Issue 4│Oct – Dec 2012 .
Somia Gul, Hina Qamar, Wardha Jawaid, et al. Women Facing Heavy Vaginal Discharge(Leucorrhoea) by virtue of unhealthy lifestyle. Published online 6 January 2013.
Des Spence,Catriona Melville. Vaginal discharge. Clinical review: 1st Dec. 2007.
Michelle Sim, Susan Logan, Lay Hoon Goh. Vaginal discharge: evaluation and management in primary care. Published online June 20202.
Najmus Sehar,Khaja Bahauddin Ansari. Concept And Management of Leucorrhoea In Unani System Of Medicine. Published online June 2016.
Vaginal Discharge. National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information.
Vaginal Discharge. National Health Service. Review online 25th Jan. 2021.
Norah Kairys, Manish Garg. Bacterial Vaginosis.StatPearls Publishing; Updated online 4th July 2022.
Francesca Mondello, Flavia De Bernardis, Antonietta Girolamo, Giuseppe Salvatore, Antonio Cassone. In vitro and in vivo activity of tea tree oil against azole-susceptible and -resistant human pathogenic yeasts.Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. Published online 01 May 2003.
Fereshteh Behmanesh, Hajar Pasha, Ali Asghar Sefidgar, Mohsen Taghizadeh, Ali Akbar Moghadamnia, Hajar Adib Rad, and Leyla Shirkhani. Antifungal Effect of Lavender Essential Oil (Lavandula angustifolia) and Clotrimazole on Candida albicans: An In Vitro Study. National Center for Biotechnology Information. Published online 2015.
Jue Zhouiand Fan Qu.Treating Gynaecological Disorders with Traditional Chinese Medicine: A Review. National Center for Biotechnology Information. Published online 2009 Jul 3.
Your Changing Body: Puberty in Girls. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Review online November 2021.
Varsha Chaudhary, Rajeev Kumar, Vijender K Agrawal, Arun Singh, Ramesh Narula, Mahendra Sharma. Prevalence And Determinants of Vaginal Discharge Among Women of Reproductive Age Group in Tertiary Care Hospital of Northern India. National Journal of Community Medicine. Published online Oct-2012.
Noura H Abd Ellah 1, Asmaa S Shaltout 2, Shreen M M Abd El Aziz 2, Ahmed M Abbas , Hasnaa G Abd El Moneem , Entisar M Youness , Amal F Arief , Marwa F Ali. Vaginal suppositories of cumin seeds essential oil for treatment of vaginal candidiasis: Formulation, in vitro, in vivo, and clinical evaluation. National Center for Biotechnology Information. Published online 18 Oct. 2020.


===============================================


