Bulimia nervosa
Also known as Bulimia
Overview
Bulimia nervosa is a eating disorder characterised by episodes of binge eating a large amount of food at a time followed by self-induced vomiting (purging) to prevent any weight gain. Consuming laxatives or diuretics, fasting, or excessive exercising are other inappropriate methods adopted in the pursuit of weight loss.

While there is no known specific cause for bulimia, family history and psychological as well as sociocultural stressors are thought to contribute to the development of this condition. People with bulimia nervosa usually have low self esteem about their body regardless of their body weight. It can affect people who are underweight, normal weight, or overweight and is more common in women and adolescents.

Bulimia has adverse affects on both physical and mental health. The complications can potentially upset every organ system of the body.

This illness is usually treated through a comprehensive approach that includes nutritional counselling, psychotherapy, family therapy and medications.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Individuals between 12-25 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Intestine
Brain
Kidney
Heart
Mimicking Conditions
Biliary disease
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Prader-Willi syndrome
Klein-Levin syndrome
Diabetes mellitus
Binge eating disorder
Anorexia nervosa
Major depressive disorder
Borderline personality disorder
Necessary health tests/imaging
Physical exam
Lab tests: Complete blood count (CBC), Serum electrolyte test, Thyroid test, Liver function test, Kidney function test & Urinalysis
Psychological evaluation
Imaging studies: X rays & Electrocardiography (ECG)
Treatment
SSRIs: Fluoxetine, Citalopram & Sertraline
Trazodone
Antiepileptic medications: Topiramate
Treatment of dehydration: Fluid therapy
Treatment of constipation: Polyethylene glycol & Lactulose
Psychotherapy: Family-based therapy (FBT), Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), Acceptance and commitment therapy, Interpersonal therapy (IPT) & Nutrition counseling
Specialists to consult
Primary care physician
Nutritionist
Psychiatrist
Gastroenterologist
Symptoms Of Bulimia Nervosa

The typical symptoms of bulimia nervosa include:
Psychological and behavioral symptoms
Being obsessive about food and weight
Fear of gaining weight
Eating large amount of food at once
Loss of control during eating 
Trying to lose weight by vomiting, exercising, dietary supplements, herbal products, or fasting after overeating
Restricting calories between binge eating
Self induced vomiting
Peculiar eating habits or rituals
Inappropriate use of laxatives or diuretics
Irregular or absence of menstruation
Anxiety
Depression
Low self-esteem
Feelings of helplessness
Intense unhappiness with self body shape and size
Physical symptoms
Sore throat 
Tiredness 
Dental problems due to erosion of enamel from vomiting
Swollen cheeks or jaw line
Constipation
Acid reflux
Dehydration

Are you just overeating occasionally or is it an eating disorder?
Find Out Now!

Causes Of Bulimia Nervosa

The exact cause of bulimia nervosa is not known. However, carious causes that are thought to trigger bulimia are discussed below:
Biological causes
Genetics
Genetics plays a very important role in developing eating disorders like bulimia nervosa.One bulimia susceptibility gene is linked to the short arm of chromosome 10. Another gene for bulimia is thought to be on chromosome 14.

Studies supporting this theory suggest that twin siblings have a 50% chance of having an eating disorder if the other twin has the disease. 

Neurobiology
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that affects appetite and mood. Low levels of serotonin in some individuals can trigger eating disorders such as bulimia. These altered serotonin levels can lead to disturbed mood and binge eating. 
Psychological factor
The idea of having a perfect body also predisposes the person to develop bulimia nervosa. 
Socio-cultural factors
The cultural preferences for being lean due to exposure to social media or other factors that portray a slim body as an ideal symbol can also cause bulimia nervosa.
Did you know?
Emotional eating is addictive in nature and this anxiety-induced hunger takes a heavy toll on the quality of our life. Here are 6 effective ways to get rid of it.
Tap To Know!
Types Of Bulimia Nervosa

According to the behavior, bulimia nervosa can be classified into two major types: 
Purging type: In this, patients often use self induced vomiting as a technique to avoid weight gain after binge eating. Other techniques such as excessive use of laxatives and diuretics can also be used in order to prevent weight gain. 
Non-purging type: This type is characterized by using other unappropriate means to avoid weight gain such as excessive exercise or fasting.
Risk Factors For Bulimia Nervosa

Age
The chances of bulimia nervosa is high in teenage years due to pressure of having a certain body type. 
Gender
This eating disorder often affects females as compared to males. Teen girls between 15 to 19 years of age are at higher risk of developing this disorder.
Family history
People with bulimia are more likely to come from families with a history of eating disorders, physical illness, and other mental health problems. Other illnesses, such as substance abuse, anxiety disorders, and mood disorders are common in people with bulimia.
Early menarche
Early start of menstruation (periods)or menarche can trigger bulimia nervosa due to sexual development which increases the need of attention. It also increases the deposition of adipose tissue in the body which can lead to dissatisfaction and trigger bulimia nervosa. 
Obesity
An obese person usually experiences pressure from family and peers to be thin which can trigger symptoms of bulimia nervosa. The increased body weight also triggers other risk factors of bulimia. 

Here are 6 health risks of obesity that you need to know.
Read To Know!

Dieting
The excessive calorie restriction for a long period of time can cause negative effects which can lead to binge eating and purging behavior. 

Note: Bulimia is very commonly seen in models and actors associated with the fashion or entertainment industry due to the obsession of having a perfect body. Studies suggest that about 40% of models engage in some sorts of eating disorders. 25% of models are reported to use self induced vomiting as a method to avoid weight gain. 
Diagnosis Of Bulimia Nervosa

DSM-5 guidelines
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) includes the following diagnostic criteria for diagnosing bulimia nervosa. 
Recurrent episodes of binge eating which is characterized by both of the following:  
Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within a two hour period)
Lack of control over eating during the episode 
Inappropriate compensatory behavior to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications, fasting, or excessive exercise.
Both of the above episodes occur at least once a week for three months.
Self-evaluation depends upon body shape and weight.
Binging or purging does not occur exclusively during episodes of behavior that would be common in those with anorexia nervosa.

There is no perfect test to diagnose bulimia nervosa. However, several tests are performed to check the effect of the disease on the overall health of the body.  
Physical exam
It includes assessment of the height, weight and the vital functions of the body such as heart rate, blood pressure, and temperature. Skin and nails are also examined in this condition. 
Lab tests
Lab tests do not confirm bulimia, however these tests are useful to determine any underline health illness. Some of the common lab tests include: 
Complete blood count (CBC)
Serum electrolyte test
Thyroid test
Liver function test
Kidney function test
Urinalysis
Psychological evaluation
This involves assessment of thoughts, feelings, and eating habits by a therapist or mental health provider. It may also involve filling a psychological self-assessment questionnaire.
Imaging studies
X-rays: These are done to measure bone density and for assessing any stress fractures.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Self-induced vomiting in bulimia can cause hypokalemia (low level of potassium in blood) which can cause heart problems such as arrhythmias(irregular heartbeat). In such cases, ECG is done to diagnose the activity and function of the heart.
Celebs affected
Richa Chadha
The famous actress Richa Chadha accepted that she developed bulimia nervosa when he came to Mumbai to become an actor. She stated that she started overeating and unable to sleep well.
Lindsay Lohan
Lindsay Lohan, famous fashion model, opened about her journey of bulimia in Vanity Fair 2006. She stated that she was sick and scared. She later recovered from it and now is comfortable in her own skin.
Lady Diana
he late lady Diana suffered from bulimia nervosa and was always candid and honest in describing her struggles with the condition.
Specialist To Visit

Most people with bulimia think that they are normal and don’t accept that they are behaving abnormally. In such cases, following questions may help in diagnosing the condition. 
Do you have repeated episodes of binge eating?
Do you feel a lack of control over your eating during an episode?
Do you engage in inappropriate purging behaviors?
Have you experienced binge eating at least once a week for three months?
Does your body weight or shape have a strong influence on your self-image?

Specialists that can help manage this condition include:
Primary care physician
Nutritionist
Psychiatrist
Gastroenterologist

To get the right diagnosis, it is important to consult the right doctor. Consult India’s best doctors online.
Consult Now!
Prevention Of Bulimia Nervosa

There is no sure way to prevent bulimia nervosa because it is affected by several factors. However, following factors may help in reducing the risk of bulimia. 
Adhering to lifestyle guidelines such as eating on time, eating a balanced diet, and exercising regularly. Sound and adequate sleep also plays a pivotal role in maintaining overall health.
Developing a healthy attitude towards eating 
Having a positive attitude towards body size and shape
Education and awareness about bulimia nervosa
Early treatment in case of any suspicion 
Balancing work, social life, adequate rest, and exercise
Maintaining a sound mental health
Did you know?
Depression could be the leading global cause of illness by 2030. Timely and accurate diagnosis followed by an effective treatment is the only way through which we can halt the rapidly increasing numbers. Here are some effective ways to reach out to your close ones coping with mental health issues.
Read Now!
Treatment Of Bulimia Nervosa

The primary goal of therapy is to inhibit the two key symptoms of bulimia nervosa which are binge eating and purging. 
Pharmacotherapy

Anti- depression medications
These medications have shown to ease symptoms of bulimia nervosa which includes reducing the frequency of binge eating and vomiting episodes. Some egs include:
Fluoxetine
Citalopram
Sertraline
Trazodone

Anti-epileptic medications
These medications, such as topiramate, have shown a reduction in binge episodes. However, the side effects especially weight loss and cognitive problems should be carefully monitored while using this medication. 
Treatment of associated symptoms

Treatment of dehydration
Bulimia nervosa can lead to dehydration, for which advised medical intervention such as saline administration is indicated to compensate for the lost fluid. 

Treatment of constipation
Constipation is very common in bulimia nervosa. The treatment includes hydration, exercise and use of dietary fiber. In severe cases, low doses of polyethylene glycol and lactulose are used. 
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy  helps the patient understand the issue in a better way and how to cope with it. The various types include: 
Family-based therapy (FBT): Also called the Maudsley method, it engages parents/family in the process of restoring the patient to a healthy weight at home. 
Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT): This therapy aims to improve mental health, and the primary focus is on addressing the distorted views on self body image.
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT): This therapy aims at recognizing the triggers and methods to manage the factors causing bulimia nervosa. DBT also helps patients in managing their mental health balance.
Acceptance and commitment therapy: This therapy aims at developing self-motivation rather than changing your thoughts and feelings.
Interpersonal therapy (IPT): This therapy helps patients to recognize and solve problems in their relationships. Improving relationships and mental health has been found to reduce eating disorder symptoms.
Nutrition counseling: A counseling with a nutritionist can help you understand the importance of diet and restoring normal eating patterns.
Home-care For Bulimia Nervosa

Nutritional planning
The effective management of bulimia nervosa requires conscious eating through understanding the calorie intake and dietary needs of the body. Keep a record of what you are eating. A well balanced nutritional planning helps in overcoming the impulsive binge eating and purging. 

It is utmost important to make the right and informed food choices and develop sound eating.
Read More!

Yoga
The patients of bulimia nervosa have a lack of physical and mental control over their actions and thoughts of self-image respectively. Yoga is an excellent tool to relieve mental stress and in controlling behavioral symptoms. 

Yoga emphasizes the holistic improvement of mind, body and the soul. Here are some of the health benefits of yoga!
Click To Read!

Meditation
It aids in calming the mind and focusing on inner self. It has shown to improve the thought of self image and impulsive behavior such as binge eating.
Emotional self care
Low self-esteem is one of the major risk factors of bulimia nervosa. Self care includes constantly reminding yourself that you are a good & beautiful person, indulging in activities that you love, thinking about the moments of your success. This can actually help in the treatment of mood swings and depression.

Being happy and healthy starts with small, everyday habits and trying some of these can make a huge difference to your life.
Read Now!
Complications Of Bulimia Nervosa

Most of the complications associated with bulimia nervosa are linked to the method used by the patient to eliminate foods from the body. Excessive vomiting and overuse of laxatives can also severely affect the digestive system. Various complications affecting the different body parts are discussed below:
Skin, hair and nails
Most of these complications start to appear when body mass index (BMI) drops below 16.  The complications include:
Hair loss
Dry skin
Rapid growth of excessive hair especially on face)
Swelling of the lips
Orange discoloration of the skin due to excess carotene in the sweat
Fragile nails

People of bulimia can develop Russell’s sign due to mechanically inserting the fingers into the mouth to induce vomiting. This sign refers to the abrasions on the back of the hand developed due to repetitive exposure of the hands into the mouth. 
Eyes and nose
The repetitive act of self-induced vomiting can cause red patches inside the white (conjunctiva) of the eye. Patients may also experience repeated episodes of nose bleeds due to purging.
Dental
The act of self induced vomiting exposes the oral cavity to gastric acid which can lead to several dental complications. Dental erosions are usually noticed after 6 months of regular onset of self induced vomiting. 

Binging on high carbohydrate content food and carbonated beverages can also lead to dental caries. The other dental complications that can develop over a period of time include:
Increased tooth sensitivity
Xerostomia (dry mouth)
Gingivitis (inflammation of the gums)
Gum irritation
Gum bleeding
Sialadenosis (salivary gland hypertrophy)
Throat
The repeated exposure of acidic contents to the vocal cords and surrounding areas can lead to: 
Hoarseness in the voice
Difficulty in swallowing
Chronic cough
Burning sensation in the throat
Repeated sore throat
Gastrointestinal
Repeated vomiting can lead to several gastrointestinal complications that include:
Esophagitis
Esophageal erosions
Esophageal ulcers
Barrett’s esophagus (change in the mucosal lining of the esophagus)
Gastrointestinal bleeding

Boerhaave’s syndrome (esophageal rupture) is a rare complication of bulimia nervosa. The syndrome is characterized by chest pain, shortness of breath. Painful yawning can also be seen in patients who have tachycardia (increased heart rate). 
Cardiac 
Dehydration due to vomiting can cause various cardiac complications. The excessive loss of electrolytes in vomiting can lead to hypokalemia – which is low levels of potassium which also negatively affects the heart. Some of the cardiac complications include: 
Sinus tachycardia (electrical signals from the heart’s sinoatrial (SA) node make the heart to beat faster than normal)
Low blood pressure
Orthostasis (low blood pressure while standing)

The use of ipecac as an inducer for vomiting can also lead to several life threatening complications which include:
Ventricular arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats which can lead to syncope and palpitations)
Congestive heart failure
Cardiac death
Lungs
In patients who purge via self vomiting, following complications may develop:
Aspiration of regurgitated food (inhalation of gastric content into the airway)
Pneumomediastinum (presence of air in the space in the chest between the two lungs)
Alternative Therapies For Bulimia Nervosa

Home remedies

Aloe vera: The binge eating and self induced vomiting in bulimia nervosa deprives the body from getting appropriate nutrition. It also causes bloating which makes the patient even more concerned about their body shape. Aloe vera soothes the stomach and also helps in reducing bloating.

Probiotics: Bulimia nervosa causes loss of beneficial bacteria that the body needs to maintain the good health of the gut. Probiotics heals the digestive system and also helps in the cultivation of good bacteria. It also increases the nutrient intake efficiency of the body.

Ginseng: It stimulates the appetite and also boosts mood. It has also shown to relieve anxiety and depression that is closely associated with bulimia nervosa.

Orange (santra): It is an excellent source of Vitamin C that helps in fighting any infection due to low immunity. They also stimulate appetite and help in reducing the desire to binge eat. 

Spinach (palak): It is a good source of folic acid that has shown to reduce depression. It also helps in rebuilding the health of the digestive system. 

Salmon: This fish is high in omega-3 fatty acid that helps in reducing anxiety and stabilizing mood. It also helps in balancing the metabolism of the body. 
Living With Bulimia Nervosa

Bulimia nervosa is a mental disorder and it affects one’s body, mind and soul. Living with bulimia nervosa can be challenging as the person always lives in dissatisfaction with their body image. Along with pharmacotherapy and conscious eating, following tips will also help the patients in speedy recovery. 
Focus on your therapy.
Take medications as directed.
Eat when hungry, and stop when full.
Appreciate your body.
Say “no” to diets.
Go for nutritional counseling to learn about healthy eating. 
Try yoga and meditation.
Be open and honest about your recovery.
Be aware of the risk of relapse.
Do things that make you happy.
Engage yourself in some activities such as gardening, painting etc when the desire to binge is too high. 
Join support groups.
Build a good support system with your parents, partner or friends. 
Get enough sleep.
Tips to sleep better!
Proper undisturbed sleep is important for improving your mood, focus and self-control. When you sleep your brain literally recharges, removing toxic proteins that accumulate during the day. This ensures that you wake up alert and clear headed. Here are some habits that can help you get a sound sleep.
Tap To Know!
Frequently Asked Questions
Does bulimia nervosa affect a woman's chances of getting pregnant?
What happens if a woman having Bulimia gets pregnant?
What is the difference between anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa?
Do all bulimia patients purge?
How bulimia affects oral health?
How can bulimia nervosa be noticed in your weight change?
References
Jain A, Yilanli M. Bulimia Nervosa. [Updated 2022 Apr 30]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Balasundaram P, Santhanam P. Eating Disorders. [Updated 2022 Jun 27]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan.
Finding a Bulimia Treatment Center, American Addiction Center, Last Updated On: 22 August, 2022.
Eating disorders, National Institute Of Mental Health. Last Updated On: December, 2021.
Chapter 15, Prevention Of Eating Disorders, Last Updated On: August 2005.
Mehler PS, Rylander M. Bulimia Nervosa - medical complications. J Eat Disord. 2015 Apr 3;3:12. doi: 10.1186/s40337-015-0044-4. PMID: 25866627; PMCID: PMC4392812.


===============================================


