Melasma
Also known as Chloasma and Mask of pregnancy
Overview
Melasma is a common skin condition that is characterized by the appearance of brown to gray-brown patches primarily on the face. It is more common in females and individuals with darker skin tones.

Sun exposure is the most important risk factor for the development of melasma. Hormonal imbalances due to pregnancy, periods, and hormonal contraceptives also stimulate the development of melasma in females. 

The basic preventive measures include having a strict sun protection regimen that involves use of a broad-spectrum sunscreen, limiting time in sun, wearing a hat while going out, and using an umbrella. 

Several treatment options are available for melasma including topical hydroquinone, which is the mainstay of treatment. However, the management of melasma is challenging due its slow response to treatment and recurrence.

While melasma does not cause any bodily complications, individuals often feel conscious about their facial appearance which can impact their emotional and mental health.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Women between 20 to 30 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Cheeks
Chin
Nose bridge
Forehead
Upper lip
Prevalence
Actinic Lichen Planus
Acanthosis Nigricans
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
Drug-Induced Photosensitivity
Exogenous Ochronosis
Frictional Melanosis
Pigmented Contact Dermatitis
Post-inflammatory Hyperpigmentation
Necessary health tests/imaging
Physical examination
Wood lamp examination
Electron microscopy
Hormonal assays: Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), Luteinizing hormone (LH), Prolactin, and Thyroid hormones. 
Dermoscopy
Treatment
Bleaching agents: Hydroquinone 
Epidermal turnover enhancers: Retinoids (tretinoin, adapalene and isotretinoin), Alpha hydroxy acids (mandelic acid) &  salicylic acid 
Ingredients that target various pathways of melanin synthesis: Retinoids (tretinoin, adapalene and isotretinoin), Arbutin (α or β Arbutin), Azelaic acid & Kojic acid
Antioxidants: Vitamin E (α-Tocoferol acetate), Vitamin C (Sodium ascorbyl phosphate, Ascorbyl Palmitate & Ascorbyl Glucoside
Topical steroids: Fluocinolone acetonide & Dexamethasone
Combination formulas: HQ + Tretinoin + Fluocinolone acetonide, HQ+ Tretinoin  + Dexamethasone+ Modified Kligman's formula (KF), Modified KF + Glycolic acid, Kojic Acid + Glycolic Acid & Azelaic acid + Retinoic acid
Oral agents: Tranexamic acid
Newer agents: Melatonin, Glutathione, Cysteamine, Methimazole & Flutamide
Device based therapies: Intense pulsed lights (IPLs), Fractional lasers (Er:Glass laser, Er:YAG laser, CO2 laser), Ablative lasers, Q-switched lasers (QSL), Picosecond lasers, Sublative lasers(fractional 1927 nm, thulium fiber laser)
Platelet-rich plasma therapy (PRP)
Specialists to consult
General physician
Dermatologist
Gynecologist (in case of pregnancy)
Symptoms Of Melasma 
  The classical symptom of melasma is the appearance of brown to gray-brown patches primarily on the face. The expression of the patches are predominant in the areas that are exposed to sun. It includes organs such as cheeks, upper lip, chin, and forehead. 
In rare cases, melasma occurs on the jawline, neck, arms, or any other organ. The color of the patches vary depending upon the skin tone of the individual and the severity of the condition. Sometimes, the patches look bluish-gray in darker skin individuals. 
There are three patterns in which melasma can be distributed:
Centrofacial: It is the most common pattern of melasma. The patches are distributed over the cheeks, nose, forehead, upper lip, and chin. 
Malar: This pattern involves the cheeks and nose.
Mandibular: It involves the jaw. 
Characteristics of patches 
There are several conditions that can cause patches on the skin. The specific characteristic of melasma include:
The color of the patches and spots are darker than the natural skin color.
The patches develop on both sides of the face.
The size of the patch is large due to the joining of the small unevenly shaped patches.
The patches are more visible in sunlight.
The patches are neither itchy nor painful.
Types Of Melasma 

Melasma can be divided into three categories based on the layer of skin involved. 
Epidermal melasma
In this, the patches are formed in the uppermost layer of the skin known as the epidermis. The patches are usually of dark brown color with a well-defined border. Epidermal melasma has a good response to the treatment. 
Dermal melasma
It is characterized by the presence of light brown to blue-gray patches that extend to the second deeper layer of the skin – the dermis. The border of the patches is usually disoriented. Dermal melasma shows a poor recovery even after the treatment. 
Mixed melasma
It is the most common type of melasma. It is characterized by a combination of blue-gray, light brown, and dark brown patches in both the dermis and epidermis. Treatment usually shows a partial improvement in such type of melasma. 
Causes Of Melasma 

Melasma is a hyperpigmentation disorder in which there is an overproduction of a pigment called melanin which is responsible for skin color. Increased melanin gets deposited in the layers of the skin and forms patches. The exact cause of melasma is complex, however, these structural and functional changes in the skin can be triggered by various risk factors discussed in the next section.
Risk Factors For Melasma 
  Melasma is triggered by various modifiable and non-modifiable factors discussed below. 
Sunlight exposure
Exposure to the sun is the biggest risk factor for melasma. Sunrays contain UV radiations which triggers the body to produce more melanin. The areas exposed to sun such as face, neck, and arms are more prone to melasma. 
Skin tone
Individuals with darker skin tones are more likely to develop melasma due to more melanin-producing cells. 
Race
Some races are more prone to develop melasma. These include Latin, Asian, Black, or Native American heritage.
Family history
Melasma tends to run in families. Studies suggest that in 40% cases of melasma individuals, there is one close relative affected with this condition. 
Gender
Women between the age of 20 to 40 are more susceptible to melasma. 
Pregnancy
Studies suggest that the chances of developing melasma in pregnancy is as high as 15 to 50%. This happens due to hormonal fluctuations. The risk is even higher during the third trimester of pregnancy due increase in the level of estrogen, progesterone, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone during that phase. The patches usually disappear on their own after delivery. If the melasma continues postpartum, it predisposes the women to premenstrual hyperpigmentation. 
Medications
Certain medications may trigger melasma. These include anti-seizure medications and birth control pills. Certain antibiotics, antihypertensives, and retinoids also make the skin more sensitive to sunlight and thus increase the risk of melasma. 
Certain cosmetics
The use of some cosmetics products may trigger melasma formation. It includes products containing chemical substances such as psoralen, tar derivatives, hexachlorophene etc. 
Tanning beds
A tanning bed is a device that emits ultraviolet radiation to give people a tan. These beds produce stronger UV rays even than sunlight. Skin exposed to UV rays triggers the production of melanin. People who use tanning beds frequently have an increased risk of melasma.
Medical conditions
People with thyroid disease are at increased risk of developing melasma. 
Stress
Stress has a very strong link in the development of melasma so it is also regarded as a “stress mask”. Stress increases the level of the hormone cortisol which increases melanin production. 

Long-term stress can adversely affect every system in the body.
Read how!

Diagnosis Of Melasma 

There are no laboratory tests for melasma. In most of the cases, diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms. Various steps of diagnosis include:
Physical examination
Most of the diagnosis of melasma is made upon physical examination of the skin. The color, texture, and border of the lesion is examined. Melasma is characterized by irregular borders with a “stuck-on” appearance. The color also indicates the type of melasma. 
Wood lamp examination
The test uses ultraviolet radiation to look at the skin closely in a dark room. It is used to assess the clinical status of the lesions. The change in brightness of the lesion during examination depicts epidermal melasma. Dermal melasma is characterized by no change in color.
Hormonal assays
Some hormonal fluctuations can also cause melasma to develop. Their levels are measured to identify the cause of melasma. The hormones that can be involved in melasma include follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), prolactin, and thyroid hormones.
Electron microscopy
This includes examination of the cells of the lesion under an electron microscope. The high amount of melanin within all the layers of epidermis (topmost layer of skin) and dermis (skin layer below epidermis) indicate melasma. 
Dermoscopy
It is a device in which skin lesions are examined using an instrument called dermatoscope. The technique uses a computer screen to capture images of the patches. It helps to analyze the severity of melasma through assessing the deposition level of melanin. 
Celebs affected
Molly Sims
The famous American fashion model and actress, Molly Sims has shared her experience about melasma several times. She wrote that she developed melasma because of not using sunscreen.
Sarah Silverman
Sarah Kate Silverman is an American stand-up comedian, actress, and writer. She shared her experience with melasma through her Instagram post. She emphasized on the importance of proper sun protection.
Specialist To Visit

Melasma does not lead to health complications, however, it affects quality of life by impacting self-esteem. 
Any change in the color of the face should be consulted with the doctor. A doctor consultation is also required to diagnose the exact condition due to its resembling symptoms with several other skin conditions. 
The specialist doctors that can help with this condition include: 
General physician
Dermatologist - The doctor who has a specialization in managing and treating skin disorders.
Gynecologist (in case of pregnancy)

Consult India’s best doctors online from the comfort of your home.
Consult Now!

Prevention Of Melasma 

Melasma has multiple causes and triggers. Most of the triggers of melasma are uncontrollable and cannot be avoided. However, preventing the exposure of sun can play a role in preventing the disease. 
The following measures can be taken to prevent exposure of the sun:
Spend less time in sun
Exposure to the sun should be restricted to prevent melasma. The person should avoid going outdoors when the sun is at its peak, which is usually 11 am to 3 pm. 
Cover yourself up 
The following measures should be kept in mind while wearing clothes for the best sun protection: 
Wear lightweight clothing
Use wide-brimmed hats
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants
Use clothes made from tight woven fabric
Use thoroughly dry clothes
Prefer darker-colored clothes. They prevent more rays overall from reaching your skin. Within the same color, more saturated hues outperform paler ones.

The level of their photoprotection offered by clothes can be measured by a factor called ultraviolet protection factor (UPF). It’s similar to SPF (Sun Protection Factor), the rating system used for sunscreens. UPF measures a fabric's effectiveness at filtering both ultraviolet A (UVA) and ultraviolet B (UVB) light. Look for a UPF above 15 and greater for good sun protection.
HAT FACTS!
How effective are hats at providing protection from the sun? Did you know that protection from the sun is dependent on the brim width of the hat?
Brim width of more than 7.5 cm has an SPF of 7 for the nose, 5 for the neck, 3 for the cheeks, and 2 for the chin. 
Brim width of 2.5 to 7.5 cm has an SPF of 3 for the nose, 2 for the neck and cheek, and 0 for the chin. 
Brim of less than 2.5 cm has an SPF of 1.5 for the nose and a minimal amount for the chin and neck.
Find shade from the sun 
Staying under an umbrella, tree, or any surface also protects the skin to get exposed to the sun when needed. 
Wear sunglasses
Sunglasses not only protect eyes but they also protect the soft skin around the eyes. They should be used while moving out under the sun. 
Use sunscreens diligently
A strict sunscreen regimen is the cornerstone of sun protection. All individuals (older than 6 months) should wear high-quality sunscreen to protect their skin while spending time under the sun. The following points will help you in choosing the right sunscreen as well as the correct method of application:
A. Type of sunscreen 
There are broadly two types of sunscreens:
1. Chemical (organic) sunscreens: These sunscreens contain ingredients that absorb UV radiations and convert them to a very low level of heat.
UV-A filters
Benzophenones (UVB and UVA2 absorbers) - Oxybenzone, Sulisobenzone, Dioxybenzone
Avobenzone or Parsol 1789 (UVA1 absorber) 
Meradimate (UVA2 absorber)

 UV-B filters
PABA derivatives – Padimate O 
Cinnamates – Octinoxate, Cinoxate
Salicylates – Octisalate, Homosalate, Trolamine salicylate 
Octocrylene
Ensulizole

Newer generation broad spectrum (UVA + UVB) filters 
Ecamsule (Mexoryl SX)
Sila Triazole (Mexoryl XL)
Bemotrizinol (Tinosorb S)
Bisoctrizole (Tinosorb M)
2. Physical (inorganic) sunscreens: These sunscreens function by reflecting, scattering or absorbing UV radiation. Their opaque nature gives a “whitening effect” which is an inherent disadvantage. However, this demerit can be minimized by the use of microfine particles. Examples include:
Zinc oxide
Titanium oxide
Iron oxide
Calamine
Talc
Kaolin

Cannot decide which sunscreen to use? Watch our expert discuss how to choose the right sunscreen for your skin type.
Click here
B. Sun protection factor (SPF): Sunscreens are assigned a sun protection factor (SPF), which is a number that rates how well they filter out UV-B rays. Higher numbers indicate more protection. A broad-spectrum sunscreen that blocks both UV-A and UV-B rays should be used with a SPF 30 or more. 
C.Protection factor (PA+): PA stands for protection grade of UV-A. It measures the ability of sunscreen to block UVA rays.This is an important distinction because SPF (sun protection factor) measures only UVB protection while the PA rating only measures UVA protection.
This is what each PA rating means:
PA+ = Some UVA protection.
PA++ = Moderate UVA protection.
PA+++ = High UVA protection.
PA++++ = Extremely High UVA protection.
D. Dosage and application: It is commonly seen that the efficacy of sunscreens fails due to insufficient application or less practice of reapplication. According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2 mg/cm2 of sunscreen should be applied to the exposed skin. It should be allowed to dry completely before sun exposure. 
E. Reapplication: Sunscreen should be applied generously to all the areas exposed to sun. It should be applied daily to in order to prevent any skin damage. It should be reapplied after every 2 hours after swimming, vigorous activity, excessive sweating, or toweling.
Will sunscreen application reduce Vitamin D levels?
Sun Rays are responsible for more than 90% of Vitamin D production in the skin. There have been concerns that the use of sunscreens may lead to a reduction in Vitamin D production. However, research suggests that the daily use of sunscreen does not compromise Vitamin D production in healthy individuals. Although, screening for vitamin D status and supplementation are recommended in patients with photosensitivity disorders.
Avoid sunbath
The cells of the melasma are easily stimulated by ultraviolet B, ultraviolet A, and visible light. Sunbath should be avoided in order to maintain a good skin tone. 
Preventing sun exposure in the employees working under the sun
Workers that work at the sites are more likely to develop melasma. However, the following measures can help prevent the same:
Sun protection should be provided when possible
Tents, shelters, and cooling stations should be provided at worksites
Works schedule that minimize sun exposure should be created
Breaks in the shade should be given to reapply sunscreen

Here are some common sunscreen mistakes that you may be making daily and should avoid. 
Know More!

Treatment Of Melasma
  The identification of cause and triggers plays a very pivotal role in the type of treatment given to the person. The basic principle of all the treatment options is to reduce melanin in the skin. There are numerous treatment options available for melasma. The choice of treatment depends upon: 
Type of melasma
Financial status of the individual
Response to prior treatments
Expectations of the patient
Skin tone
Severity of melasma
Aim of the treatment
Eliminate already existing pigmentation
Block new pigmentation
Restoring the natural color of the skin

A.Topical agents
These are the preparations that are directly applied to the affected skin. They are the first-line agents for treating melasma and are mostly available as creams and ointments. 
Bleaching agents
These are the preparations that lighten the skin by blocking the production of melanin.
Hydroquinone (HQ) is the most commonly prescribed depigmenting agent worldwide and it has remained the gold standard for the treatment of melasma. 
NOTE: HQ comes with its own adverse reactions like irritation, redness, stinging, and allergic contact dermatitis, nail discoloration, etc and should only be used under strict medical supervision.
Epidermal turnover enhancers
These medications increase the turnover of the outer layer of skin. The pigmented cells of the outer layer get peeled off and the skin replaces them with normally pigmented cells. Examples include
Retinoids (tretinoin, adapalene and isotretinoin)
Alpha hydroxy acids like mandelic acid, glycolic acid
Beta hydroxy acid like salicylic acid 
Ingredients that target various pathways of melanin synthesis
Excessive melanin production is responsible for melasma. Some examples of agents that block the various ways of melanin production include:
Retinoids (tretinoin, adapalene and isotretinoin)
Arbutin (α or β Arbutin)
Azelaic acid
Kojic acid
Niacinamide (Vit B3)
Antioxidants
They work via scavenging the free radicals in the skin. Examples include: 
Vitamin E (α-Tocoferol acetate)
Vitamin C (Sodium ascorbyl phosphate, Ascorbyl Palmitate, Ascorbyl Glucoside)
Topical steroids
Steroids are used usually due to its anti-inflammatory effect. They are used along with other topical medications. The common examples include Fluocinolone acetonide and Dexamethasone.
Combination formulas
Various topical agents can be combined for a better therapeutic effect. In addition to having a synergistic effect, a particular drug may reduce side effects of another drug. For example, topical steroids may reduce the irritant effects of HQ or retinoids. On the other hand, retinoids may prevent steroids induced skin degeneration or atrophy. Some examples of combinations that are available in the market to treat melasma include:
HQ + Tretinoin + Fluocinolone acetonide
HQ+ Tretinoin  + Dexamethasone+ Modified Kligman's formula (KF) which is a  triple combination of 4% hydroquinone, 0.05% tretinoin, and 0.01% fluocinolone acetonide
Modified KF + Glycolic acid 
Kojic Acid + Glycolic Acid 
HQ  + Glycolic acid
Azelaic acid + Retinoic acid 

B.Oral agents
Oral agents are used when the individual is not finding any improvement with topical agents. Tranexamic acid is used orally to reduce the patches of melasma. Individuals taking oral medication can use topical creams and sun protection to augment the process.

C.Newer agents
It includes recently researched medications for melasma. They have shown promising evidence in the management of melasma, both alone and in conjunction with other melasma therapies. However more research is warranted for their use. Few examples include: 
Melatonin
Glutathione
Cysteamine
Methimazole
Flutamide

Explore our widest range of products targeting skin hyperpigmentation.
Add to cart!
D. Device-based therapies
Laser and light-based therapies are usually reserved for resistant cases and are considered as third-line agents in the treatment of melasma. This approach is most effective in light-skinned individuals. Various types of lasers used in the management of melasma include:
Intense pulsed lights (IPLs)
Fractional lasers (Er:Glass laser, Er:YAG laser, CO2 laser)
Ablative lasers
Q-switched lasers (QSL)
Picosecond lasers
Sublative lasers(fractional 1927 nm, thulium fiber laser)
Other lasers - copper bromide laser
Various combinations of lasers
E. Platelet-rich plasma therapy (PRP)
In PRP, the patient's blood is drawn and placed into a device called a centrifuge. The centrifuge rapidly spins the blood, separating the other components of the blood from the platelets (a type of blood cells) and concentrating them within the plasma. A small volume of this plasma containing a high concentration of platelets is injected back into the body of the patient.
PRP has shown promise when used in combination or alone as treatment for melasma.

Special considerations- Treatment during pregnancy
Treatment may not be necessary because melasma in pregnancy may be transient and removal of the hormonal trigger after childbirth may result in considerable improvement. Moreover, melasma is more resistant to treatment during pregnancy because of the persistent hormonal trigger. Hence, treatment for melasma is mostly deferred until after delivery.
  Listen to our expert discuss melasma in detail and answer most FAQs regarding the condition.
Watch now!

Home Care For Melasma 

The following home remedies are known to decrease hyperpigmentation associated with melasma. However, they should be tried only after consent from the doctor.
Turmeric (Haldi): Studies have shown reduction in the appearance of facial hyperpigmentation, fine lines and wrinkles after applying topical extract of turmeric. 
It can also be mixed with milk and applied directly on the skin. 
Aloe-vera: Aloe vera contains an ingredient called aloesin which is known to reduce the synthesis of melanin. Apart from this, the highly moisturizing effect of the aloe vera prevents dryness and irritation as well. 
Licorice (Mulethi): The compound liquiritin possesses properties that help in reducing pigmentation associated with melasma. It is shown to reduce inflammation and UV-B-induced pigmentation. The powder of mulethi can be mixed with water to make a face pack.
Green tea: Green tea is known for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Studies have shown its effect in treating melasma also. Apply the wet green tea bags to the pigmented areas of the skin, and massage in gentle circular motions until the tea is absorbed. You can also mix it with some water to make a face pack.
Soyabean: The application of soy extract has been shown to reduce the pigmentation of melasma. 
Red lentils (Masoor daal): The face mask made of red lentils can be used in skin pigmentation. It can be applied as a paste by mixing the grinded paste of soaked lentils with water or milk. 
Mulberry (Shahtoot) leaves: The extract of mulberry leaves is known to be used traditionally for the management and prevention of diabetes. Recent studies suggest its role in melasma as it helps in reducing the synthesis of melanin. 

Mulberries are a powerhouse of nutrients. Read about the health benefits of mulberries.
Tap here!
Tomato: It contains lycopene which is a potent antioxidant that neutralizes free radicals. It helps in preventing the redness caused by UV radiation. It also reduces the damaging effect of UV light and protects the skin from sunburn and thus melasma.  
The tomato pulp can be applied directly on the face or as a paste mixed with olive oil. 
Cucumber (Kheera): The extract of cucumber has strong moisturizing abilities. It is known for its ability to remove dead skin cells. Recent studies have also shown its effect on protecting the skin from sun exposure. It can be simply applied on the affected areas as a grated piece.
Indian beech tree: Studies have shown that the extract of leaves of the Indian beech tree have a potential sunscreen activity with good absorbance of UV rays. 
Almond (Badam): Topical application of almond extract has significant photoprotective activity. Soak almonds overnight. Peel them and make a paste with water or honey to make a facepack.
Saffron (Kesar): The dried pollen of the saffron plant can be used to protect the skin from sun. Take water in a bowl and sprinkle a few strands of saffron in it. Add 2 tablespoons of turmeric powder and make a paste. The paste can be directly applied on the affected skin. 
Natural oils
Jojoba oil: This oil is known for its effect in treating skin conditions such as eczema, psoriasis and dry skin. It also contains a chemical called myristic acid which provides sun protection. 
Carrot seed oil: This oil possesses significant antioxidant, antiseptic, and antifungal properties. It provides natural sun protection when applied topically to the skin. 


Complications Of Melasma 
  Melasma does not lead to any complications but it has a huge impact on the emotional health of the individual. Individuals often feel conscious or distressed about their appearance. Self-image and self-esteem may suffer as a result of this condition. 

Note: There is a tool known as The Melasma Quality of Life Scale (MelasQOL) that is designed to provide quantification of melasma’s impact on a patient's quality of life.
Alternative Therapies For Melasma 
  Microneedling (mesotherapy)
It is a technique in which small channels in the skin are created to deliver the drug. This is used to deliver the drug in the layers of the skin. Studies suggest an improvement in melasma when micro-needling is used with topical medications. 
Cosmetic camouflage
It includes the use of concealers and other pigmented cover-ups to even skin complexion. This approach is used as an adjuvant therapy that has been proven to improve psychosocial effects and quality of life.  
Living With Melasma 
  Seek help from a professional
Melasma should be treated strictly under a medical practitioner. Over the counter medications can prove to be ineffective or damaging to the skin. 
Protect your skin from the sun every day
Sunrays are the most important trigger for melasma. It is very important to protect the skin from the sun even on cloudy days. Sunscreen should be applied daily irrespective of the weather.  

Choose a sunscreen from our extensive range
Order Now
Apply skincare correctly
Individuals with melasma should apply skincare and make-up in the right order. The recommended order that the dermatologist recommends includes first the application of topical medication followed by sunscreen and camouflage make up. 
Establish a good face-cleansing regimen
Individuals having melasma should follow a good cleansing regimen since dirty skin is prone to melasma. Pollution can contribute to melasma by corroding the protective surface of the skin. The corroded skin is more susceptible to sun damage. Patients should clean their skin regularly with a gentle cleanser before going to bed. The skin cleansing regimen should also be followed after coming home from the outside.

Order skin cleanser from the comfort of your home.
Shop Now
Combat skin stress with antioxidants
Antioxidant serums containing Vitamin C and E helps in healing the damage from sunlight. Individuals with melasma should apply these serums to protect the skin from photodamage. 

Confused about choosing the right serum for your skin?
Watch this video to help you decide
Moisturize your skin regularly
Dry skin is more prone to sun damage. So, use a good moisturizer after applying serum to restore the lipid barrier of the skin. 

Explore our wide range of moisturizers for smooth supple skin.
Order Now
Avoid waxing
Waxing the skin area having melasma should be avoided as it may cause skin inflammation and aggravation of hyperpigmentation
  Here are some important do’s and don'ts of melasma care.
Read here!
Managing the emotions
Melasma impacts emotional well-being due to the presence of prominent facial lesions. Counseling focusing on the duration of treatment is proven to be helpful for emotional stability. The condition can be frustrating to both the patient and the doctor because of its slow response to treatment and recurrence. Studies revealed that melasma affects quality of life (QoL) negatively. QoL includes physical, mental, and social well-being of an individual. Many people affected emotionally may spend a lot on medical and cosmetic treatments without satisfactory results. 
The following measures might help: 
Engage yourself in activities you like such as crafting, painting, and singing
Do regular exercise as it helps in reducing stress
Join any support group either online or offline
Ask help from a professional counselor
Meet someone who is undergoing the same type of treatment
Be patient. Even with treatment, it may take months for melasma to clear up. 
Be diligent. Melasma will be quick to return if you're not careful about sun protection. So, long-term maintenance requires an ongoing commitment to protecting your skin.
Frequently Asked Questions
Is the linea nigra of pregnancy related to melasma?
Will melasma resolve completely after pregnancy?
What is the treatment option of melasma during pregnancy?
Why is melasma difficult to treat?
Is melasma seasonal?
References
Basit H, Godse KV, Al Aboud AM. Melasma. [Updated 2022 Aug 8]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan.
Melasma, American Academy Of Dermatology Association, Last Updated On: 15/02/22.
Unmasking the causes and treatment of melasma, Women’s Health, Harvard Health Publishing, Harvard Medical School, Last Updated On: 13 October, 2020.
Mpofana N, Chibi B, Visser T, Paulse M, Finlayson AJ, Ghuman S, Gqaleni N, Hussein AA, Dlova NC. Treatment of Melasma on Darker Skin Types: A Scoping Review. Cosmetics. 2023; 10(1):25.
Damevska, Katerina. (2014). New aspects of melasma. Serbian Journal of Dermatology and Venereology. 6. 5-18. 10.2478/sjdv-2014-0001.
Melasma, DerNet, All about the skin, Last Updated On: October 2020.
Espósito ACC, Cassiano DP, da Silva CN, Lima PB, Dias JAF, Hassun K, Bagatin E, Miot LDB, Miot HA. Update on Melasma-Part I: Pathogenesis. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2022 Sep;12(9):1967-1988. doi: 10.1007/s13555-022-00779-x. Epub 2022 Jul 29. PMID: 35904706; PMCID: PMC9464278.
Ogbechie-Godec OA, Elbuluk N. Melasma: an Up-to-Date Comprehensive Review. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2017 Sep;7(3):305-318. doi: 10.1007/s13555-017-0194-1. Epub 2017 Jul 19. PMID: 28726212; PMCID: PMC5574745.
Abdalla MA. Melasma Clinical Features, Diagnosis, Epidemiology and Etiology: An Update Review. Siriraj Medical Journal. 2021 Dec 1;73(12):841-50.
Phansuk K, Vachiramon V, Jurairattanaporn N, Chanprapaph K, Rattananukrom T. Dermal Pathology in Melasma: An Update Review. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2022 Jan 6;15:11-19. doi: 10.2147/CCID.S343332. PMID: 35023942; PMCID: PMC8747646.
Sun Safety, Centers For Disease Control and Prevention, Last Updated On: 18 April, 2023.
Hollinger JC, Angra K, Halder RM. Are Natural Ingredients Effective in the Management of Hyperpigmentation? A Systematic Review. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2018 Feb;11(2):28-37. Epub 2018 Feb 1. PMID: 29552273; PMCID: PMC5843359.
Avianggi HD, Indar R, Adriani D, Riyanto P, Muslimin M, Afriliana L, Kabulrachman K. The effectiveness of tomato extract on superoxide dismutase (SOD) and severity degree of patients with melasma. Ital J Dermatol Venerol. 2022 Jun;157(3):262-269. doi: 10.23736/S2784-8671.22.07152-3. PMID: 35707866.
Melasma Clinical Presentation, Medscape, Last Updated On: 26th April, 2020.
Skin darkening during pregnancy (melasma or chloasma), babycenter.
Aghaei S, Moradi A. Introductory Chapter: Quality of Life in the Patients with Melasma [Internet]. Pigmentation Disorders - Etiology and Recent Advances in Treatments. IntechOpen; 2023.
5 Celebrities That Have Opened Up About their Struggles with Melasma, Yahoo Life, Last Updated On: October 2017.
Goswami PK, Samant M, Srivastava R. Natural sunscreen agents: A review. Sch. Acad. J. Pharm. 2013;2(6):458-63.
Donglikar MM, Deore SL. Sunscreens: A review. Pharmacognosy Journals. 2016;8(3).
Latha MS, Martis J, Shobha V, Shinde RS, Bangera S, Krishnankutty B, Bellary S, Varughese S, Rao P, Kumar BN. Sunscreening agents: a review. The Journal of clinical and aesthetic dermatology. 2013 Jan;6(1):16.
Gabros S, Nessel TA, Zito PM. Sunscreens and Photoprotection. [Updated 2023 Mar 7]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls.
Mahajan VK, Patil A, Blicharz L, Kassir M, Konnikov N, Gold MH, Goldman MP, Galadari H, Goldust M. Medical therapies for melasma. Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology. 2022 Sep;21(9):3707-28.
Cassiano DP, Espósito AC, da Silva CN, Lima PB, Dias JA, Hassun K, Miot LD, Miot HA, Bagatin E. Update on Melasma—Part II: Treatment. Dermatology and Therapy. 2022 Sep;12(9):1989-2012.
Grimes PE, Ijaz S, Nashawati R, Kwak D. New oral and topical approaches for the treatment of melasma. International Journal of Women's Dermatology. 2019 Feb 1;5(1):30-6.


===============================================


