Food allergies
Also known as Food hypersensitivity and Allergic reaction to food
Overview
If you have a food allergy, your immune system mistakenly identifies a food protein as something harmful, and coming in contact with that protein triggers an allergic reaction. Symptoms can occur when coming in contact with just a tiny amount of food. 

The most common triggers of this reaction include eggs, fish, milk, peanuts, shellfish, soy, tree nuts, and wheat. The symptoms of food allergy include difficulty breathing, chest tightness, rashes (hives), and itching all over your body.

Children between the age of 6-11 years are most commonly affected and the common risk factors include a family history of allergic reactions, asthma, and age of introduction to solid foods. 

The best way to prevent any allergic reaction is to avoid the food items that are causing it. In case of accidental exposure or emergency, adrenaline can be used. Antihistamines and bronchodilators may be used to provide relief from symptoms.

Accurate diagnosis and successful management of allergies are essential to prevent any severe reactions in the future. An allergist or immunologist has specialized training and experience to diagnose the problem and develop a prevention plan. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Children between 6 to 11 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in men
Body part(s) involved
Skin
Respiratory system
Gastrointestinal system
Cardio-vascular system
Central nervous system
Prevalence
Worldwide: 3% to 10% (2020)
India: 0.14% (2020)
Mimicking Conditions
Factitious disorder
Esophagitis and esophageal motility disorders
Giardiasis
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Irritable bowel syndrome
Bacterial or viral gastroenteritis
Lactose intolerance
Whipple disease
Necessary health tests/imaging
Skin prick test (puncture or scratch test)
Serum-specific IgE
Atopy patch tests (APT) 
Oral food challenge (OFC)
Treatment
Adrenaline (epinephrine) injection
Antihistamines
Bronchodilators
See All
Symptoms Of Food Allergies

The type and severity of symptoms change from one person to another. The symptoms include:
Skin symptoms
Angioedema (swelling under the skin)
Urticaria (itching)
Flushing
Warm feeling
Respiratory symptoms
Chest tightness
Wheezing
Cough
Swelling in tongue, palate, or uvular 
Upper airway stridor (high-pitched breathing sound)
Hoarseness of voice
Sneezing
Gastrointestinal symptoms
Vomiting
Nausea
Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Cardiovascular symptoms
Tachycardia (increased heart rate)
Bradycardia (decreased heart rate)
Chest pain
Hypotension (decreased blood pressure)
Syncope (fainting)
Arrhythmias (abnormal heart rate)
Heart palpitations
Neurological symptoms
Headache
Altered mental status
Seizure
Dizziness
General symptoms
Anxiety
Pallor
Weakness


Did you know?
Food and skin allergies are very common in children. Read about the common causes of skin allergies in kids.
Tap now


Causes Of Food Allergies

Food allergies refer to an abnormal immunologic response to a food that occurs in a susceptible person. These reactions happen each time the food is ingested and they are often not dose-dependent. Based on the immunological mechanism involved, food allergies may be caused due to the following responses:

IgE-mediated: These are mediated by antibodies belonging to the Immunoglobulin E (IgE) and are the best-characterized food allergic reactions.
Cell-mediated: When the cell component of the immune system is responsible for food allergy and primarily involves the gastrointestinal tract. 
Mixed IgE mediated-cell mediated: When both IgE and immune cells are involved in the reaction.
Foods that can commonly cause allergic reactions

In young children
Cow’s milk 
Egg 
Peanut 
Soy 
Tree nut
Shellfish

In adults
Shellfish
Peanut
Tree nut
Fish

Do you want to know which food you are allergic to? There is a test for it that measures the levels of allergen-specific antibodies.
Read now



What is Allergy - Adult Comprehensive Panel, ImmunoCAP?
It comprises 30 tests that help to identify certain allergens that trigger your body. Know more about this test.

Read now


Risk Factors For Food Allergies

There is no way to accurately predict who will develop a food allergy, but there are certain factors that can act as increase the risk and they include:
Risk factors during pregnancy 
Tobacco smoke: Exposure to smoking increases the risk of sensitization to food allergens.
Unbalanced diet: Studies have shown a link between maternal diet and risk of childhood asthma and other allergic diseases.

Food habits during pregnancy are important! Read more about what foods to eat and what to avoid. 
Click now



Risk factors during childbirth
Birth via cesarean section: Children born through cesarean section might have an increased risk of developing food allergies.
Risk factors after childbirth
Gut microbiota: The presence of specific bacterial strains can influence the development of food allergy
Infections: Exposure to infections in early childhood might increase susceptibility to allergic disease by altering the development of the immune system.
Age of the introduction of solid foods: Introduction of solids into a child's diet from the age of 7 months or later is associated with a higher risk of food allergy or intolerance.
Other risk factors
Family history of allergic diseases: Having a single family member with a history of the allergic disease increases the risk of food allergy in the child.
Infant eczema: Studies suggest that any break in the skin (which can happen due to eczema) increases the chances of exposure to the allergen.

Do you suffer from itchy eczema? Know about 6 home remedies to relieve the symptoms.
Read This


Vitamin D deficiency: A deficiency of vitamin D is considered a possible risk factor for food allergy development.
Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs): These are derived from cooked meat, oil, and cheese, and have a high concentration of sugar. AGEs initiate signals, leading to the development of food allergies.

Read more about signs and symptoms of vitamin D deficiency.
Read Now


Age: Food allergies are more common in children, especially toddlers and infants. 
Asthma: Asthma and food allergy commonly occur together. Also, individuals with food allergies have a higher risk of developing asthma and rhinitis.
Race: Racial differences have also been associated with a higher prevalence of food allergy. 
Sex: Males are known to be at a higher risk of food allergies than females. 
Diagnosis Of Food Allergies

Clinical history along with allergy and other lab tests are used in the identification of allergen triggers. These include:
Patient’s history and examination
The patient’s clinical history and examination are the first-line approaches in diagnosing food allergy. It includes a systematic review of the patient’s diet, the timing of the first and last occurrences of similar allergic reactions, and history that considers the symptoms of allergic reactions to food.
Laboratory tests

1. Skin prick test (puncture or scratch test): This test inspects for immediate allergic reactions to different allergens at the same time. It is usually performed on the forearm in adults and on the upper back in children.

2. Serum-specific IgE: This test was known as RAST(Radioallergosorbent testing). It measures how much IgE your body makes in response to a single allergen and is preferred when the skin prick test (the favored allergy test) is not suitable or not available.

3. Atopy patch tests (APT): This test is used to assess delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions.
Other tests

1. Oral food challenge (OFC): The gold standard for food allergy diagnosis. During this test, the allergist feeds the suspect food in measured doses. With each dose, the allergist will watch the individual for a period of time for any signs of a reaction.

2. Endoscopy and biopsy: These may not be very useful for the detection of food allergy, but are used to diagnose non-IgE-mediated disorders.

Get all your labs in the safety and comfort of your homes with the best professionals. 
Consult Now


Celebs affected
Ekta Kapoor
Ekta Kapoor, the Indian TV Czarina, got tested and found that she is allergic to cauliflower. Taking to Instagram's story, the producer shared pictures of her hands and wrote: "Testing food allergies, if anyone else has them, is the great way to find out."
Sabrina Carpenter
Sabrina Carpenter is an American singer, confirmed her apple allergy on Twitter in 2016, telling fans that a previous tweet about loving apples referred to Apple products, not the fruit.
Malia Obama
When President Barack Obama signed a 2013 bill to increase the availability of epinephrine in schools, he spoke about his daughter, Malia's, peanut allergy. Obama said at the time. "Making sure that EpiPens are available in case of emergencies in schools."
Prevention Of Food Allergies

Dealing with food allergies can be daunting. As all know prevention is better than cure, strategies for the prevention of food allergy might include primary prevention, which seeks to prevent the onset of the reaction, and secondary prevention, which seeks to interrupt the development of the reaction. They include:
Prevention in pregnant women
Some food allergies develop in the womb itself, and unborn children may be sensitized to the foods their mothers consume. 

Understand what foods to avoid during pregnancy and more diet tips. 
Prevention in breastfeeding mothers
Read Now


It has been hypothesized that mothers may inadvertently sensitize their children to certain foods through breast milk, but there is little evidence that changing what mothers consume when breastfeeding prevents food allergies in infants.

What does every new mother need to know? Read more about 5 foods to eat while breastfeeding.
Click to Know


Prevention during infancy
The prevention strategies include:

Age at introduction of solid foods: Studies found reduced food allergy when solids were introduced as early as 4 months.

Supplements: Postnatal fish oil consumption is associated with decreased food sensitization and food allergies in infants and may provide an intervention strategy for allergy prevention.

Shop from our widest range of omega-3 fatty acids and fish oil supplements.
Visit Now


Prevention for older children and adults
The prevention strategies for children and adults include:

Avoidance of allergens: This is very important but not always easy. Some allergens are easier to avoid than others, if avoiding an allergen is difficult, try to reduce your contact with it.

Taking medicines as prescribed: They can be helpful for managing the symptoms of an allergic reaction. 

Maintaining a diary: this is to track what you eat when symptoms occur and what seems to help. This may help you and your doctor find what causes or worsen your symptoms.

Eat 2 hours before exercise: Some food allergies can be triggered by exercise, so to prevent that from happening, eating 2 hours prior to exercise is a good practice.
Specialist To Visit

Food allergies can lead to severe allergic reactions that become a medical emergency. Always be prepared and contact the emergency department of the nearest hospital in case of severe food allergy. Doctors that can help you with this are:

General physician
Allergist
Immunologist
Dietician
Pediatrician

An allergist is a medical practitioner specializing in the diagnosis and treatment of allergies. An immunologist is a doctor who diagnoses, treats, and works to prevent immune system disorders.

If you notice any symptoms of food allergy, seek advice from our world-class professionals. 
Consult Now


Treatment Of Food Allergies

There is currently no treatment for food allergy, except for avoidance of the responsible food/ foods. Once a food allergy is diagnosed, strict elimination of the offending food allergen from the diet is necessary.
In the case of accidental exposure
The treatment of choice during accidental exposure leading to a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), adrenaline (epinephrine) injection is used. It is administered by intramuscular injection into the thigh. 
Medicines to manage the symptoms
Several medicines are available in the market for initial immediate treatment of food allergy like:

1. Antihistamines: They can relieve gastrointestinal symptoms, hives, sneezing, and a runny nose.

2. Bronchodilators: They can relieve the symptoms of asthma, however, they are not effective in preventing an allergic reaction when taken prior to eating the food.

Know how to tackle allergies in the risk-free way.
Read This


Home-care For Food Allergies

The best way to avoid unpleasant symptoms of a food allergy is by avoiding the food entirely. Though the list of remedies that can work for food allergies is short , it can be very effective. If there is a mild reaction here are some home remedies that can prove beneficial to relieve the food allergy symptoms:

Ginger (Adrak): Ginger is believed to help speed up digestion, which may benefit those with stomach discomfort and indigestion caused by trigger foods. It can also prevent gas and reduce bloating and cramping.
Probiotics: Unbalanced bacteria in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract can play a role in many chronic conditions, including food allergies. Probiotics have been found to be preventive and therapeutic against food allergies.
Lemon (Nimbu): Lemons are high in vitamin C, a powerful antioxidant that helps maintain a robust immune system and protects against infection and disease.
Green tea: Green tea is rich in antioxidants and can help fight inflammation. There are certain studies that suggest that green tea can hinder mast cell activation and block histamines, which can be helpful for allergic reactions.
Carrots (Gajar): Carrots are rich in beta-carotene, a powerful antioxidant that has been shown to increase immune cell numbers and activity.

Drinking large amounts can lead to carotenemia, which can cause your skin to turn slightly yellowish.

Read more about the benefits of carrots that are good for your health. 
Read More


Complications Of Food Allergies

Food allergy is an important public health problem that affects children and adults. Food allergy complications include:
Anaphylaxis: It is a life-threatening condition that can lead to constriction and tightening of the airways.
Respiratory distress: Exposure to food allergens can trigger respiratory symptoms like isolated asthma or rhinitis in rare cases.
Heart attack: Cardiovascular symptoms can be the sole manifestation of exercise-induced food allergies.
Did you know?
Very rarely, a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) can occur post-COVID-19 vaccination as well. Get all your queries answered on COVID-19 vaccination.
Click Now
Alternative Therapies For Food Allergies

Food allergies can be irritating, but the mild ones do not generally cause a lot of problems. Apart from regular medications, there are other therapies as well that have proven to be beneficial. Some of them include:
Chinese herbal therapies
Studies suggest that an herb-based formula (FAHF-2) used in traditional Chinese medicine may be an effective approach to food allergy treatment that is not specific to any one food allergen and can be potentially used to treat multiple food allergies
Acupuncture
It is the practice of inserting hair-thin needles into the body at strategic points to relieve specific symptoms. Acupuncture supports the immune system and can relieve symptoms associated with seasonal and food allergies.
Homeopathy
Homeopathy works by correcting the immune responses of individuals rather than suppressing or modifying the immune system. It has proven to be beneficial for individuals with allergic reactions or allergic diseases.

Read about 6 homeopathy facts that everyone should know.

Click Now

Living With Food Allergies

Food allergies are not very serious and do not affect the quality of life in most cases. All you need to do is make certain lifestyle modifications and learn to manage in case of emergency. A number of general strategies and tips may be helpful in managing food allergies. A few of them include:
Always read the food labels
Read every label, every time to see whether any additives contain milk protein or byproducts of wheat, or whether a food was produced in a facility that processes nuts. Manufacturers frequently change ingredients and an allergen may be part of a new formulation.
Take care while cooking
It's a good idea to have two sets of cooking and eating utensils one exclusively for the allergic person and all dishes and utensils should be thoroughly washed in hot, soapy water between uses.
Be extra cautious while dining out
Dining out may seem fun, but if an unknown food allergen is consumed by mistake it can lead to complications. So it is wise to let the manager or chef know about the food allergy before placing the order. 
Wear a medical ID bracelet
Make sure it lists relevant information about your food allergy and always carry your medication, ideally two doses. 
Know what to do during an allergic reaction 
If someone is suffering from a severe allergic reaction the:
Call the local medical emergency number immediately.
See If the person is carrying an epinephrine auto-injector 
Help the person inject the medication by pressing the autoinjector against the person's thigh.
Make the person lie face up and be still.
Loosen their tight clothing and cover the person with a blanket. 
Turn the person to the side to prevent choking if there's vomiting or bleeding from the mouth.
Position the patient in the Trendelenburg position i.e lying flat on the back with legs elevated in order to allow blood flow to the heart.
If there are no signs of breathing, coughing, or movement, begin CPR (start uninterrupted chest presses about 100 every minute).

Correct first aid can help save a life! Know more about step-by-step instructions for emergency management.

Read Now

Frequently Asked Questions
How common are food allergies?
How do food allergies affect my body?
What is the difference between food allergies and food intolerances?
What are the life-threatening symptoms of food allergies?
When should one see their doctor for a food allergy?
When should one rush to the hospital?
References
Waserman and Watson. Food Allergy. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2011, 7(Suppl 1): S7.
Calvani M, Anania C, Caffarelli C, Martelli A, Miraglia Del Giudice M, Cravidi C, Duse M, Manti S, Tosca MA, Cardinale F, Chiappini E, Olivero F, Marseglia GL. Food Allergies: an updated review on pathogenesis, diagnosis, prevention, and management. Acta Biomed. 2020 Sep 15;91(11-S):e2020012.
Abrol, G.S., Sharma, K.D., Singh, A.K., Pal, R. and Pandey, A.K. (2019). Food Allergy: An Important Health Hazard. Int. J. Food Ferment. Technol., 9(2): 55-65.
Antonella Cianferoni and Jonathan M Spergel. Food Allergy: Review, Classification, and Diagnosis. Allergology International. 2009;58:457-466.
J. L. Turnbull et al. Review article: the diagnosis and management of food allergy.
and food intolerances. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 41: 3-25.
Thacher JD, Gruzieva O, Pershagen G, Neuman Å, van Hage M, Wickman M, Kull I, Melén E, Bergström A. Parental smoking and development of allergic sensitization from birth to adolescence. Allergy. 2016 Feb;71(2):239-48.
Du Toit et al. Prevention of food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Vol 137, Number 4.
Baïz et al. Maternal diet before and during pregnancy and risk of asthma and allergic rhinitis in children. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol (2019) 15:40.
Eggesbø M, Botten G, Stigum H, Nafstad P, Magnus P. Is delivery by cesarean section a risk factor for food allergy? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;112(2):420-426.
Koplin JJ, Allen KJ, Gurrin LC, Peters RL, Lowe AJ, Tang ML, Dharmage SC; HealthNuts Study Team. The impact of family history of allergy on risk of food allergy: a population-based study of infants. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013 Oct 25;10(11):5364-77.
Manea I, Ailenei E, Deleanu D. Overview of food allergy diagnosis. Clujul Med. 2016;89(1):5-10.
van Ree R (2021) Grand Challenges in Food Allergy. Front. Allergy 2:668479.
Safety of Oral Food Challenges. Oral Food Challenge. Food Allergy Research & Education. 2022.
de Silva et al. Primary prevention of food allergy in children and adults: systematic review. Allergy 69 (2014) 581–589 © 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Clausen M, Jonasson K, Keil T, Beyer K, Sigurdardottir ST. Fish oil in infancy protects against food allergy in Iceland-Results from a birth cohort study. Allergy. 2018 Jun;73(6):1305-1312.
Waserman and Watson Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2011, 7(Suppl 1):S7.http://www.aacijournal.com/content/7/S1/S7
Jin BY, Li Z, Xia YN, Li LX, Zhao ZX, Li XY, Li Y, Li B, Zhou RC, Fu SC, Li SY, Li YQ. Probiotic Interventions Alleviate Food Allergy Symptoms Correlated With Cesarean Section: A Murine Model. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 28;12:741371.
Maeda-Yamamoto M. Human clinical studies of tea polyphenols in allergy or lifestyle-related diseases. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(34):6148-6155.
Wang J. Treatment of food anaphylaxis with traditional Chinese herbal remedies: from mouse model to human clinical trials. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;13(4):386-91.
The burden of allergic diseases in the Indian subcontinent: barriers and challenges. The Lancet. Vol 8 April 2020.
Messina, Mark ,et al. Nutrition Today: 1/2 2020 - Volume 55 - Issue 1.


===============================================


