Pancreatitis
Also known as Inflammation of pancreas
Overview

The pancreas is a small organ located behind the stomach and below the ribcage. Pancreatitis is a condition that is characterized by irritation or inflammation of the pancreas. It happens when digestive juices or enzymes attack the pancreas. Pancreatitis can be acute or chronic depending on the onset. Either form is serious and can lead to complications.

The main symptom in patients with acute pancreatitis is constant stomach pain. It often spreads to the back, chest, waist, and lower abdomen. It can extend to diabetes, infections, bleeding, and kidney problems The symptoms of chronic pancreatitis can be diarrhea, vomiting, weight loss, and constant stomach pain on the upper side.

Pancreatitis is generally seen in individuals after 30-40 years of age. The risk factors can be gallstones, alcoholism, infections, genetic disorders, injury to the pancreas, and pancreatic cancer.

The strategy for pain management is lifestyle modifications and medications. Avoiding alcohol and smoking, eating small, frequent meals, and eating foods high in antioxidants like folate can also prove to be very beneficial in managing the symptoms. Treatment is generally based on the type and severity of the condition. 
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Individuals between 30 to 40 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in men
Body part(s) involved
Pancreas
Prevalence
Worldwide: 3.2% (2022)
Mimicking Conditions
Peptic ulcer disease
Cholangitis
Cholecystitis
Bowel obstruction
Bowel perforation
Mesenteric ischemia
Acute hepatitis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Basilar pneumonia
Myocardial infarction
Aortic dissection
Renal colic
Necessary health tests/imaging
Laboratory tests: Serum amylase, Complete blood, count, Serum lactate, Serum triglycerides & HbA1c level
Imaging tests: X-rays, Abdominal ultrasound, and Computed tomography (CT) scan
Treatment
Medications: Paracetamol, Morphine, and Corticosteroids.
Surgery: Pancreas resection and Total pancreatectomy.
Supportive care: Fluid resuscitation NG tube (nasogastric tube), and Oxygen administration
See All
Types of Pancreatitis

When digestive juices or enzymes attack the pancreas it causes redness and swelling (inflammation) of the pancreas. Types of pancreatitis include:
1. Acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is a serious condition where the pancreas becomes inflamed over a short period of time. In acute pancreatitis, inflammation lasts for a short duration (a week). In this condition, the pancreas returns to normal afterward.
  Note: Acute pancreatitis is more common in middle-aged and elderly people, but it can affect people of any age.

2. Chronic pancreatitis
This is a condition where the pancreas becomes permanently damaged from inflammation. In chronic pancreatitis, inflammation lasts for a long duration that comes and goes over time. It often causes scarring of pancreatic tissue. It may also cause the pancreas to stop making enzymes and insulin in severe cases.

Try our extensive range of immunity-boosting products to upgrade your immune system to fight infections and inflammation.
Shop now
Symptoms Of Pancreatitis 

Pancreatitis symptoms vary depending on the type. The main symptom is generally pain due to the upper left side or middle of the stomach that may spread to your back. Symptoms based on the type include:

1. Symptoms of acute pancreatitis
In acute pancreatitis pain begins slowly or suddenly in your upper abdomen, and usually spreads to the back. This pain can be mild or severe and may last for several days. Other symptoms include:
Fever
Nausea and vomiting
Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes)
Tenderness or swelling of the stomach (abdomen)
Rapid heartbeats

2. Symptoms of chronic pancreatitis
In chronic pancreatitis pain is present in the upper abdomen that may spread to your back, which is constant and severe. The intensity of pain may become worse after eating. Other symptoms include:
Diarrhea
Nausea
Greasy, foul-smelling stools
Vomiting
Weight loss
Back pain
Do you know that there is an association between covid-19 and pancreatitis?
A study has shown that 17% of patients suffering from severe COVID-19 have a pancreatic injury.
Learn more about Covid 19
Causes Of Pancreatitis

The pancreas is a gland that plays two important roles: 
Helps in making enzymes and sends them into your small intestine. These enzymes help break down food.
Makes the hormones insulin and glucagon and releases them into your bloodstream. These hormones control your body’s blood sugar level.

Most of the time, the enzymes are active only after they reach the small intestine.

These enzymes can degrade pancreatic tissue if they start to function inside the organ. This harms the organ's blood arteries and produces swelling, bleeding, and damage.

In acute pancreatitis, the pancreas's digestive enzymes are not effectively secreted, which causes auto-digestion and pancreatic inflammation (swelling). Certain diseases, surgeries, and habits make you more likely to develop this condition.
Did you know?
As per a study, 35% to 40% of cases of acute pancreatitis are linked to gallstones and 30% of cases are linked to alcohol abuse.
Risk Factors For Pancreatitis

The most common causes of both acute and chronic pancreatitis are:

1. Gallstones
Gallstones are the most common cause of pancreatitis. Gallstones obstruct the bile and enzyme drain when they exit the gallbladder and enter the bile ducts. The bile and enzymes "back up" into the pancreas and cause swelling.

Do you suffer from gallstones?
Here is a list of 5 foods that you need to add to your diet if you have gallstones.
Know more

2. Heavy alcohol use
Alcohol is the second most common factor associated with acute pancreatitis after gallstones. Excessive alcohol consumption can initiate an episode of acute pancreatitis and increase the susceptibility to chronic pancreatitis. 

3. Genetic disorders of your pancreas
Some people also have a genetic susceptibility to pancreatitis. Mutations (changes) in the number of genes disrupt the normal function of the pancreas and make the pancreas more vulnerable to the harmful effects of alcohol.

4. Infections
Mumps, hepatitis A or B, and certain bacteria or viruses (such as varicella-zoster virus, herpes simplex virus, salmonella, aspergillus, etc.) are also responsible for pancreatitis.

5. Injury to your pancreas
Accidental damage or injury to the pancreas or stomach (for example during a procedure to remove gallstones or examine the pancreas) can lead to pancreatitis.

6. Pancreatic cancer
Cancerous tumors in the pancreas can sometimes block the pancreatic duct, which hinders the entry of pancreatic enzymes to the gut to digest food. This ultimately may lead to chronic pancreatitis.

7. Certain diagnostic procedures
Some of the procedures used to diagnose gallbladder and pancreas problems like endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) or ultrasound-guided biopsy damage the pancreas leading to chronic pancreatitis.

8. Pancreas divisum
This is a birth defect in which parts of the pancreas do not join together. This congenital defect has been associated with chronic pancreatitis.

9. Medications
Specific medications like some antibiotics or chemotherapy medication (especially estrogens, corticosteroids, sulfonamides, thiazides, and azathioprine) have been linked to acute pancreatitis as their side effects.

10. Blockage in pancreatic duct
Blockage of the bile ducts or pancreatic ducts (that form an important part of the digestive system) can cause pain and may lead to chronic pancreatitis.
.
11. High levels of lipids
Elevated level of lipids (body fat) in the blood and may cause harm to the pancreatic cells due to continuous inflammation. This ultimately leads to pancreatitis. 

Check your lipid levels with a simple test called the lipid profile test.
Know more about this test

12. High calcium levels
High levels of calcium can cause depositions in the pancreatic duct leading to pancreatitis. 

Understand what serum calcium test is and why it is important.
Watch this video now



13. Autoimmunity
People with other autoimmune conditions are at higher risk of getting autoimmune pancreatitis. These are uncommon disorders that cause your immune system to attack healthy cells in your pancreas. 

14. Smoking
The number of cigarettes a person smokes and the number of years they have smoked affect a person's chances of incurring pancreatitis. Smoking accelerates disease progression. It is advisable to quit smoking at any age to reduce the risk of developing pancreatitis. 

Here are a few practical ways to quit smoking
Click Here
Diagnosis Of Pancreatitis

The detailed evaluation of a patient is required to diagnose pancreatitis. It includes:

1. History
The doctor in charge of your care will ask you about the history of your symptoms. They may also carry out a physical examination. If you have acute pancreatitis, certain areas of your abdomen will be very tender to touch. The doctor may ask about a detailed history of medical conditions such as:

Gallbladder stones
Alcohol abuse
Medication use
History of weight loss
History of diabetes
Previous surgery or trauma
Hypertriglyceridemia or hypercalcemia (high levels of lipids and calcium)
Autoimmune disease
Genetic causes

2. Laboratory evaluation
Blood test: A blood test will be carried out to detect signs of acute pancreatitis which involves the release of pancreatic enzymes. These include:

Elevated amylase level in the blood
Elevated serum blood lipase level (a more specific indicator of pancreatitis than amylase levels)
Increased urine amylase level
Other tests include: Complete blood count, serum lactate, serum triglycerides, c-reactive protein (CRP), blood urea nitrogen (BUN).

Pancreatic function test (PFT): This test measures how your pancreas responds to secretin, a hormone made by the small intestine.
Stool test: This test is done to find out if a person has a problem with the absorption of fats.
HbA1c level: It is a blood test that measures your average blood sugar levels over the past 3 months. 
Genetic testing: It is done to know the genetic history or if the patient has any kind of genetic disorder.

Book your tests here

3. Imaging Tests
The following imaging tests that can show swelling of the pancreas may be done, such as-

Ultrasound: This test involves the use of high-frequency ultrasounds to visualize the organs and structures within the pancreas.

Computed tomography (CT) scan: These are the standard non-invasive imaging techniques used to assess people who may have chronic pancreatitis.

 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan: MRI and MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) are recommended, especially in patients without specific changes detected on CT scans. 

Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP): It is carried out to look for fibrosis (thickened and stiff tissues) in patients with chronic pancreatitis.

Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP): It involves injecting you with a substance known as a contrast agent that makes your pancreas and surrounding organs show up very clearly on a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner.
  4. Biopsy
A biopsy involves taking a small sample of cells from the pancreas and sending it to a laboratory, so it can be checked under a microscope for the presence of cancerous cells.
Celebs affected
Travis Barker
Musician Travis Barker, most famously known as the drummer for Blink-182, was recently hospitalized with a severe case of acute pancreatitis. It was previously reported that Barker's pancreatitis was the result of a colonoscopy, not an endoscopy."
George Clooney
Oscar-winning actor George Clooney suffered from pancreatitis. Clooney put it down to his severe weight loss and not taking care of himself.
Prevention Of Pancreatitis

A healthy lifestyle can reduce your chances of developing this medical condition. Acute pancreatitis is often caused by gallstones or excessive alcohol consumption. You may lower your risk of new or repeat episodes of pancreatitis by taking the following steps:

1. Eat right
The most effective way of preventing gallstones is eating a healthy balanced diet that includes fresh fruits and vegetables. Try to include wholegrains as they lower the bad cholesterol level in the blood and avoid eating too many fatty foods with a high cholesterol content.

Understand how to reap benefits from your diet.
Click Here

2. Focus on your weight
Try to maintain a healthy weight, otherwise, it may increase the risk of forming gallstones. It is advised to have regular exercise to avoid developing this condition.

Want to know the health risks of being overweight or obese?
Click Here

3. Cut down your alcohol
You can reduce your risk of developing acute pancreatitis by limiting your alcohol intake. This helps to prevent damage to the pancreas and other medical conditions also such as liver cancer.

4. Get the necessary treatment
High cholesterol levels are associated with the development of pancreatitis. Hence. treat medical problems that lead to high blood levels of triglycerides to prevent the condition.

5. Do not neglect vaccinations
Make sure children receive vaccines to protect them against mumps and other childhood illnesses so that the chances of development of pancreatitis are reduced.

6. Say Yes to No smoking
According to studies, smoking is related to increasing the risk of developing gallstones which can cause pancreatitis.

Want to quit this dangerous habit?
Try our widest range of smoking cessation products to help you with it.
Buy now
Specialists To Visit

The specialists you can visit to get the diagnosis and treatment include:

General surgeon
Radiologist
Gastroenterologist
Intensivist
Pulmonologist
Endocrinologist

A radiologist is a doctor who uses X-rays or other high-energy radiation, especially a doctor specializing in radiology. A gastroenterologist is a specialist who treats all the organs in your digestive system. An intensivist is a board-certified physician who provides special care for patients who are critically ill. A pulmonologist is a doctor who has special training in diagnosing and treating diseases of the lungs. An endocrinologist is a doctor who has special training in diagnosing and treating disorders of the glands and organs that make hormones.

To get the right diagnosis, it is important to consult the right doctor. Consult India’s best doctors online. 
Book an appointment now.
Treatment Of Pancreatitis

Acute pancreatitis is treated in hospital, where you'll be closely monitored for signs of serious problems and given supportive treatment, such as fluids and oxygen. The treatment consists of:

1. Medications
The doctor may prescribe you some medications such as steroids (like corticosteroids), and mild to strong painkillers (like paracetamol, morphine, etc.) to get relief in severe abdominal pain.

Note: You may also need pancreatic enzyme supplements to help digest your food.

Order medicines online in the comfort of your home with just a click!
Buy now

2. Management of alcoholism and tobacco abuse
After recovering from acute pancreatitis, you should completely avoid alcohol if this was the cause of the condition. For this, you can have one-to-one counseling with a doctor or medicine such as acamprosate that helps to hinder alcohol cravings.
For smokers, anti-smoking treatment, such as nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) or bupropion (a medication used to reduce cravings for cigarettes), is recommended.

3. Surgery
Depending on the exact cause of your pain, there are a variety of surgical techniques that may be used to treat chronic pancreatitis, such as-

For gallstone-associated pancreatitis: You may need a procedure called endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), or gallbladder removal surgery (to remove your gallbladder).

Endoscopic surgery: It is done for patients with stones in the pancreatic duct. This treatment is called lithotripsy (it involves using shock waves to break the stone into smaller pieces).

Pancreatic resection: In this procedure, specific parts of the pancreas that are inflamed and causing severe pain are removed surgically. It is used if endoscopic treatment is ineffective.

Total pancreatectomy: In serious cases of chronic pancreatitis, the whole pancreas is damaged, in such a situation the entire pancreas is removed.

4. Supportive care
Fluid resuscitation: Fluid resuscitation or fluid replacement is the medical practice of replenishing bodily fluid lost through sweating, bleeding, or other pathological processes.

NG tube (nasogastric tube): It can be used to remove fluid and air and give your pancreas more time to heal. It can also be used to put liquid food into your stomach as you heal.

Oxygen administration: To ensure your vital organs have enough oxygen, it will usually be supplied through tubes into your nose. The tubes can be removed after a few days, once your condition is improving.
Home-care For Pancreatitis

If you are suffering from pancreatitis pain, natural methods along with your medical treatment can bring you greater comfort and relief. Home care remedies for pancreatitis relief includes:

1. Turmeric (Haldi): It is a powerful antioxidant that reduces inflammation and provides relief from the symptoms of an inflamed pancreas.


2. Ginger (Adrak): It also contains antioxidants that help control swelling and boost the enzymes needed for proper digestion.


Want to know about other health benefits of ginger?
Read this


3. Coconut oil (Nariyal ka tel): It is rich in omega-3 fatty acids. It not only reduces swelling, and repairs damaged tissue but also boosts nutrient absorption.


Know more about Omega 3 supplementation.
Tap Here


4. Spinach (Palak): Apart from being rich in antioxidants, spinach also contains vitamins A, B, C, and E, iron, and selenium, which is very essential for pancreas health.


5. Mushrooms: It has an anti-inflammatory and analgesic effect that helps in relieving the symptoms of pancreatitis.


Read about 6 surprising reasons to add mushrooms to your food more often
Click Here
Complications Of Pancreatitis

Pancreatitis, if left untreated may lead to various complications, such as:

Pseudocysts (fluid that can develop on the surface of the pancreas)
Infected pancreatic necrosis (interruption to the blood supply of your pancreas)
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS- inflammation affecting the pancreas spreads throughout the body)
Chronic pancreatitis
Diabetes
Pseudoaneurysms (when a blood vessel wall is injured)
Splenic vein thrombosis (blood clotting within splenic vein)
Recurrent acute pancreatitis
Risk of progression to pancreatic cancer
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS- fluid collects in the air sacs of the lungs)
Compartment syndrome (pressure builds up within the muscles)
Acute kidney injury (AKI)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation(DIC- blood's inability to clot and stop bleeding)
Alternative Therapies For Pancreatitis

It is suggested that no one should begin an alternative therapy without speaking with their physician. Alternative therapies that can help manage symptoms of chronic pancreatitis include:

1. Yoga
Studies show that practicing yoga at least 3 times a week improves pain, reduces the need for pain medication, and also improves the quality of life.

Want to know the other benefits of yoga that even doctors swear by?
Read this now

2. Therapeutic touch
It is a process of energy exchange, in which the practitioner uses the hands as a focus to help the healing process. It helps in relaxation giving a sense of comfort and well-being that is effective in decreasing anxiety and altering the perception of pain.

3. Massage therapy
It involves part of a body or a full body massage using different techniques of stroking or kneading the muscles of the body. It improves blood circulation, reduces swelling, and helps manage pain. 

4. Physical exercise
It improves the overall functioning of the body and quality of life.Reduces stress, pain, nausea, fatigue, and depression, and affects hormonal balance.

5. Acupuncture
It involves the stimulation of points on the body by a variety of techniques to relieve pain from pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.
Living With Pancreatitis

Pancreatitis symptoms can appear unexpectedly and be painful, uncomfortable, inconvenient, and embarrassing. Eating healthy, exercising regularly, reducing weight, limiting alcohol intake, quitting smoking, etc. can go a long way in managing the condition. Pancreatitis patients may experience a wide range of emotions as a result of their condition.
It can be managed by the following:

Talking to the loved ones
Joining support groups
Understanding the physical limitations
Starting palliative care to get relief from other symptoms
Coping with practical issues like financial expenses, childcare, and work issues

Role of caregivers
Caregivers play a very important role in the overall disease outcome of the patient diagnosed with Pancreatitis. The important role of caregivers is:

Making decisions about disease management options.
Participating in doctor appointments and keeping regular follow up with the doctor.
If the surgery has been carried out, giving the medicines to the patient on time, changing dressings, helping to take bath, and checking the surgery sites.
Helping with meals.
Frequently Asked Questions
What are the causes of pancreatitis attacks?
Does pancreatitis go away on its own?
Will smoking impact pancreatitis?
Can pancreatitis be fatal?
How can pancreatitis be avoided?
References
Treatment for pancreatitis.National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Available at:
StatPearls (2022) Acute pancreatitis, StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing. Available at:
What is Pancreatitis? Pancreatitis. | Johns Hopkins Medicine. Available at:
Zheng Z et al. Review article a narrative review of the mechanism of acute.Am J Transl Res 2021;13(3):833-852. Available at:
Mohy-ud-din N, Morrissey S. Pancreatitis. [Updated 2022 Jul 11]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2022 Jan-. Available from:
Complementary pancreatitis therapies - National Pancreas Foundation (2017) National Pancreas Foundation -. Available at:
Sareen S, Kumari V, Gajebasia KS, Gajebasia NK. Yoga: a tool for improving the quality of life in chronic pancreatitis. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jan 21;13(3):391-7.
Lifestyle Changes. Treatment. Pancreatitis.National Health Services (NHS UK). Available at:
Parenti DM, Steinberg W, Kang P. Infectious causes of acute pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1996;13(4):356-371. Available at:
Keim, Volker & Klar, Ernst & Poll, Michael & Schoenberg, Michael. (2009). Postoperative care following pancreatic surgery: Surveillance and treatment. Deutsches Ärzteblatt international. 106. 789-94. 10.3238/arztebl.2009.0789.
Fiore, V., Beretta, R., De Vito, A., Barac, A., Maida, I., Joeseph Kelvin, D. D., Piu, C., Lai, V., Madeddu, G., Rubino, S., Stevanovic, G., Korica, S., & Babudieri, S. (2022). Emerging Clinical Features of COVID-19 Related Pancreatitis: Case Reports and Review of the Literature. Frontiers in Medicine, 8.


===============================================


