Tiredness
Also called Fatigue, Weakness, Low on energy, Sleepy
Overview
A feeling of tiredness can be described as feeling sleepy, weak, low on energy and lacking the motivation to perform daily activities. It can occur due to poor lifestyle habits, psychological factors or some underlying health conditions. Generally, it has been found that women report tiredness more often than men.

Tiredness can be acute and may be relieved with a good night’s sleep. However, when tiredness lasts for several weeks, it can lead to chronic fatigue. It is essential to seek medical care when tiredness starts interfering with day-to-day activities, as it may be a symptom of some underlying health condition. 

Along with medications to treat the underlying cause, alternative therapies play an important role in overcoming tiredness. These include meditation techniques, massage, yoga, ayurvedic and some home remedies.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults above 65 years of age
Gender affected
Both men & women
Body part(s) involved
Whole body
Mimicking Conditions
Sleep apnea syndrome
Fibromyalgia
Necessary health tests/imaging
Complete hemogram
Serum electrolyte
Urine routine and microscopy
Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
Thyroid stimulating hormone
Iron studies
ECG
Treatment
Supplements: Vitamin C & Folic acid
Analgesics: Ibuprofen & Diclofenac
Antibiotics
Oral hypoglycemic drugs: Metformin, Glimepiride & Sitagliptin
Beta-blockers, diuretics, or calcium channel blockers
Thyroxine 
Anti-anxiety medicines: Fluoxetine & Venlafaxine 
Specialists to consult
General physician
Urologist 
Diabetologist
Endocrinologist
Oncologist
Hematologist
Cardiologist
Symptoms Of Tiredness

Tiredness can happen to anyone. Tiredness in itself is a symptom best described as -
Feeling sleepy all the time.
Not having enough energy to perform routine activities.
Not feeling refreshed even after taking ample rest.
A lack of motivation or enthusiasm for day-to-day activities.
Feeling drained out or low on energy after performing simple tasks.

Tiredness may also be associated with other symptoms such as -
Headaches
Dizziness
Confusion
Mood-swings and irritability
Breathlessness
Muscle weakness and muscle aches
Causes Of Tiredness

There could be a number of causes which can cause tiredness. These are broadly classified as follows -

Lifestyle factors
Being jet-lagged
Alcoholism and chronic smoking
Drug abuse
Excess caffeine consumption
Increased workload
Heavy exercise
Poor diet and malnutrition
Dehydration
Rotating work shifts
Obesity

Psychological factors
Anxiety disorder or stress
Chronic depression
Eating disorders like anorexia nervosa
Increased stress due to circumstances like the loss of a loved one, unemployment, etc.

Health conditions
Anemia
Pregnancy
Vitamin D deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes Mellitus
Cancer and chemotherapy
Fever and infections
Sleep apnea syndrome
Heart diseases like ischemic heart disease, heart failure
Fibromyalgia
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)
Arthritis
Multiple sclerosis
Certain medications
Did you know chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) can decrease your daily activity levels by 40%.
Tired all the time? Do you feel tired even after getting a good night’s sleep? Well, this could be chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Your doctor will figure out which symptom is most problematic for you, try to treat that first. Also, you will need new ways to manage your daily activities. Make sure that you do not “push and crash”.
Check Health Drinks!
Risk Factors For Tiredness

You may be at risk for tiredness if you:
Have a poor lifestyle
Suffer from health disorders such as anemia
Are a woman
Are above 60 years of age

Furthermore, the National Institute on Aging lists the following lifestyle habits that can lead to tiredness and fatigue:
Staying up too late
Having too much caffeine
Drinking too much alcohol
Eating junk food
Diagnosis Of Tiredness

When tiredness becomes chronic and starts interfering with day-to-day activities significantly, it is essential to establish a cause for chronic tiredness or fatigue so that it may be appropriately treated. The doctor may ask detailed questions about your lifestyle, history of sleep and try to identify whether tiredness is due to lifestyle or psychological factors.

Along with a detailed history and physical examination, the following tests may be essential to determine if the tiredness is due to any underlying physical disorder:
Complete hemogram and serum electrolyte to screen for overall health, presence of parasitic infections, electrolyte imbalance, etc.
Urine routine and microscopy to check for latent urinary tract infections.
Glucose - fasting blood and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) to evaluate diabetes mellitus.
Thyroid stimulating hormone to evaluate hypothyroidism.
Liver function test, kidney function test to check the metabolic health of the body.
Iron studies in cases of suspected anemia.
ECG, lipid profile to check cardiac health.
PET CT in cases of suspected malignancy.
Further testing or imaging studies may be essential if a diagnosis cannot be made on these preliminary tests.
Celebs affected
Varun Dhawan
Bollywood actor Varun Dhawan reportedly fainted on the sets of the Bollywood movie Super Dancer 3D due to fatigue and low blood pressure.
Meghan Markle
The Duchess of Sussex Meghan Markle had skipped a two-day royal tour of Zambia as she was suffering from fatigue during her pregnancy.
Prevention Of Tiredness

Most of the time, tiredness can be prevented by making changes in lifestyle and habits. While it is not possible to completely prevent tiredness arising out of health conditions, lifestyle changes may help in reducing the intensity of the symptoms.

Following lifestyle modifications can help prevent tiredness -
Take a wholesome diet rich in protein, vitamins, and minerals. Cut back on processed foods.
Drink plenty of fluids throughout the day, especially during the summer season.
Establish a sound sleep schedule. Do not sleep during the day.
Cut down on caffeinated beverages and alcoholic beverages.
Quit smoking.
Exercise daily, but do not over-exercise. Meditation or yoga can also help.
Specialist To Visit

When tiredness becomes chronic and interferes with basic day-to-day activities in a major way, it is essential to seek medical care. You may first consult with your family physician and in case of underlying health conditions, you may be referred to specialists such as -
Urologist
Endocrinologist
Oncologist
Hematologist 
Cardiologist 

Excessive tiredness can indicate a lot of health problems which can range from anemia and vitamin deficiencies to diabetes. Here's a detailed explanation on the common health problems that could lead to excessive tiredness and may require you to book an appointment at your doctor’s clinic.
Click Here To Read!

Treatment Of Tiredness

In most cases, the treatment of tiredness is aimed at improving the diet and lifestyle of the patient. This includes eating a diet rich in nutrients, ensuring 8 hours of sleep, exercising to stay active and maintaining overall physical and mental well being. In some cases, psychological therapy is required to improve the symptoms if there is some underlying mental health issue. After evaluation, the doctor may recommend weekly or fortnightly charts to assess improvement in symptoms and change in treatment plan if required.
  If these interventions fail to improve the condition, then a combination of lifestyle changes, diet modifications along with the use of medicines is recommended. Medications are usually required to treat the health condition that may be causing the symptoms of tiredness.

Supplements like Vitamin C and folic acid for treatment of anemia
Analgesics like ibuprofen and diclofenac and joint care medications to treat arthritis
Antibiotics to treat the infection and paracetamol formulations to help relieve fever
Oral hypoglycemic drugs like metformin, glimepiride, repaglinide, sitagliptin, or insulin preparations like lispro and glargine to treat diabetes mellitus
Beta-blockers, diuretics, or calcium channel blockers for heart diseases like ischemic heart disease and heart failure
Thyroxine preparations for people with hypothyroidism
Anti-anxiety medicines like fluoxetine and venlafaxine for anxiety
Home Care For Tiredness

If you are constantly tired, it is important to identify what is causing tiredness so that the cause may be addressed and treated accordingly. There are certain things you can do at home that may help combat tiredness -

1. Consume a wholesome and balanced diet rich in vitamins and minerals.
2. Drink plenty of water, fluids like coconut water, buttermilk etc. throughout the day.
3. Do not engage in strenuous activities that may worsen your fatigue, especially if you have health conditions that are causing it.
4. Avoid daytime naps. It is better to get 8 hours of sound sleep at night instead of catching up on sleep in bits and parts.
5. Reduce excessive consumption of caffeinated drinks (especially in the evening) and alcohol. 
6. Quit smoking and recreational drugs.
Complications Of Tiredness

Tiredness may worsen and become so severe that it becomes difficult for the person to even get up from the bed to perform activities like grooming or visiting the bathroom. The person may become bedridden and completely dependent on caregivers.
Chronic Fatigue ≠ Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
It is a complicated disorder that causes extreme and long-term fatigue, persisting for at least 6 months or more. It does not go away even after getting prolonged rest and sleep. This does not occur due to any underlying medical condition and is often considered to be imaginary.
Click To Know More!
Alternative Therapies Of Tiredness

Along with medical treatment for underlying health conditions, some alternative therapies can also help in overcoming the feeling of tiredness:

Diet and energy drinks: Consuming a balanced diet rich in essential nutrients and maintaining good hydration are excellent ways of providing energy to your body. Although coffee or other caffeinated drinks may boost energy levels in the morning, they must be consumed in moderation and not later in the day as they may interfere with the sleep schedule.

Meditation: Meditation can help channel and conserve the body’s energy. It may also help overcome fatigue and boost energy levels.

Massage: Gentle body massage has been known to promote relaxation and improve blood flow to various parts of the body. This may help rejuvenate the body and boost energy levels.

Psychotherapy: Counseling and psychotherapy can help when the feelings of tiredness arise from psychological conditions rather than physical disorders. Overcoming anxiety and depression may be the key to resolving the symptoms of tiredness and fatigue.

Exercise and yoga: Light exercises and yoga help boost the body's energy levels and are a great way of combating tiredness. However, care must be taken not to overdo the physical activities as it may lead to overexertion.

Yoga has been practiced since ages now. It offers several benefits to the body other than improving flexibility and posture. Here are a few yoga asanas that will help you fight fatigue and keep you refreshed.
Click Here To Read!


Ayurveda: Certain ayurvedic herbs like Ginseng, Ashwagandha, Shatavari, Licorice, etc., may be useful in overcoming tiredness. 

Homeopathy: Homeopathic preparations like Cadmium Sulphuricum, Phosphorus, Lycopodium Clavatum, Nux Vomica, Calcarea Phosphorica, etc., have been found to be useful in combating fatigue due to cancer.
Living With Tiredness

Living with chronic tiredness and fatigue can be challenging and can hamper the quality of life of the patient. Simple day-to-day activities, like grocery shopping or going to work, or simple household tasks, like cooking and cleaning, may drain the energy of the patient and leave them exhausted. 
  A tired individual may not get a sound sleep at night as they may be taking frequent naps throughout the day. A lack of a good night’s sleep may cause weariness, forcing one to nap again during the day. This leads to a vicious cycle and leaves the person even more fatigued. Certain health conditions that cause tiredness may also have other problematic symptoms that may lead to a poor quality of life.
  Owing to our fast paced lifestyles and hectic schedules, we often find ourselves excessively tired throughout the day. Most of the time, excessive fatigue is a result of lack of exercise, inadequate diet, nutritional deficiencies, and lack of sleep. Here are some simple and effective ways to fight fatigue.
Read Now!
Frequently Asked Questions
Why do I feel tired?
Can tiredness be a sign of something serious?
Which food items help boost energy?
Can daily exercise help combat tiredness?
How to overcome tiredness associated with anemia?
How much sleep is essential to overcome tiredness?
References
Moncrieff G, Fletcher J. Tiredness. BMJ. 2007 Jun 9;334(7605):1221.
Stadje, R., Dornieden, K., Baum, E. et al. The differential diagnosis of tiredness: a systematic review. BMC Fam Pract 17, 147 (2016).
Greenberg DB. Clinical Dimensions of Fatigue. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2002 Jun;4(3):90-93.
Katja Boehm et al. Effects of Yoga Interventions on Fatigue: A Meta-Analysis. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Volume 2012 |Article ID 124703.
Arring NM, Millstine D, Marks LA, Nail LM. Ginseng as a Treatment for Fatigue: A Systematic Review. J Altern Complement Med. 2018 Jul;24(7):624-633.
Brulé D, Gillmeister B, Lee M, Alexander S, Gassas A, Hendershot E, Zupanec S, Dupuis L, Sung L. A Feasibility Pilot Trial of Individualized Homeopathic Treatment of Fatigue in Children Receiving Chemotherapy. Integr Cancer Ther. 2016 Dec;15(4):495-501.


===============================================


