Indigestion
Also known as Dyspepsia, Abdominal Discomfort, Stomach Upset
Overview
A sensation of pain or discomfort in the upper abdominal region accompanied by a feeling of fullness, bloating, and flatulence is known as indigestion or dyspepsia. Some of the common causes of indigestion include sedentary lifestyle, eating habits, certain medications, and some gastrointestinal illnesses like GERD.

In most cases, indigestion can be controlled by making simple lifestyle changes such as taking a physical activity, balanced healthy diet and consuming alcohol and carbonated beverages in moderation. If lifestyle measures fail to improve the condition, then the use of over-the-counter (OTC) medications like antacids are suggested to improve indigestion. Prescription drugs like prokinetics and antibiotics may also be advised to treat the underlying cause of indigestion.

If indigestion becomes a chronic problem and/or is accompanied by other symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting, blood in the stools, severe abdominal pain, or chest pain, it is essential to seek prompt medical care.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Adults above 25 years of age
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in women
Body part(s) involved
Stomach
Large intestine
Small intestine
Oesophagus
Prevalence
Worldwide: 10 - 30% (2018)


Mimicking Conditions
Esophagitis
Gastritis
GERD
Esophageal Spasm
Gastrointestinal Malignancy
Necessary health tests/imaging
X-Ray Abdomen
USG Abdomen
Dual Phase CT Abdomen
Barium Meal Follow Through
Barium Swallow
Complete Hemogram
Lipid Profile Plus
Liver Function Test
Stool Examination R/M
Treatment
Probiotics
Digestive enzymes
Antacids
Prokinetic agents
Mesalazine formulations
Tegaserod
Antibiotics for treatment of H.pylori infection- Amoxicillin, Clarithromycin ,Tetracycline
Tricyclic antidepressants
See All
Symptoms Of Indigestion

Indigestion refers to a sensation of pain or discomfort in the upper abdominal region. It is not a disease in itself but instead presents as a group of symptoms seen in certain gastrointestinal diseases.
  You may be suffering from indigestion if you have the following symptoms -
Feeling full too soon while eating meals
A sensation of bloating in the abdomen
Abdominal cramps
Pain along the sides of the stomach
Burning sensation in the stomach or upper abdomen
Hyperacidity
Nausea and vomiting
Growling or grinding sounds in the stomach
Acidic taste in the mouth
Burping or belching up stomach contents 
Flatulence
  Seek medical attention in the following conditions:
 Unintentional weight loss or loss of appetite
 Repeated vomiting or vomiting with blood
Black, tarry stools
Trouble swallowing that gets progressively worse
Fatigue or weakness, which may indicate anemia
 Causes Of Indigestion

Many factors can cause Indigestion such as -
Lifestyle and dietary factors
Consuming excess alcohol, caffeinated beverages, and carbonated beverages irritate the stomach and cause indigestion.
Eating larger meals that are fried, spicy, or salty also causes stomach upset.
Eating stale and undercooked food.
Excessive smoking also irritates the stomach and causes indigestion
Leading a sedentary lifestyle
Overeating or eating too quickly
Being stressed or overly anxious most of the time
Gastrointestinal diseases
Many gastrointestinal diseases cause an upset stomach, such as -
GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease): It causes the contents of the stomach to hurl back into the esophagus and cause symptoms like heartburn and dyspepsia (indigestion).
Gastroparesis: It is a condition in which the stomach is not able to empty itself due to affected motility of the stomach. This leads to the sensation of fullness and bloating.
Irritable bowel syndrome: It is a condition that affects the absorption of food from the intestines and can cause indigestion.
Celiac disease: In this condition, the body abnormally reacts to gluten, a protein found in grains such as wheat and barley.
Malabsorption syndrome: It is a condition in which the small intestine is not able to absorb nutrients from the food and body.
Gastrointestinal infections: It can cause acute inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract, known as gastritis or gastroenteritis. These may be caused by a variety of microorganisms. 
Chronic pancreatitis: It can often cause bloating, flatulence, and indigestion.
Gastric cancers: They are a rare condition but could be a probable cause of indigestion.
Medications
Certain medications like NSAID painkillers, antibiotics like fluoroquinolones  tetracycline, iron and potassium supplements, cardiovascular drugs like digitalis, etc., can irritate the gastric lining and cause hyperacidity, bloating, or indigestion.

Functional dyspepsia
This type of indigestion with no apparent cause is chronic and can last for more than 6 months. It is not associated with stool irregularities either.
  Other conditions
Sometimes indigestion is caused by other conditions such as:
Gallstones
Constipation
Reduced blood flow in the intestine (intestinal ischemia)
Diabetes
Thyroid disease
Pregnancy
 Risk Factors For Indigestion

Indigestion is a very common condition that affects people of all ages and sex. The incidence of indigestion is found to be higher among 
Smokers
Alcoholics
Frequent use of NSAIDs/painkillers
Individuals who have suffered from H. Pylori infection
Diagnosis Of Indigestion

A single episode of indigestion is not a cause for concern and requires no further evaluation. However, if indigestion is recurrent, accompanied by other troublesome symptoms, and interferes with the person’s daily life and activities, lab investigations and imaging studies may be needed to establish the cause of indigestion.

Laboratory tests
Laboratory tests play a limited role in the evaluation of indigestion. Complete hemogram, Lipid profile plus, and liver function test may give an insight into the general health of the patients. Breath test and stool examination R/M may be performed to check for the presence of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori), the bacterium associated with peptic ulcers and also to find out any disease association, which can cause indigestion.
Imaging studies

X-Ray abdomen - helps visualize the internal organs of the abdomen and looks for the presence of obstruction or as part barium swallow testing.
USG Abdomen, Dual Phase CT Abdomen - to visualize the internal organs of the abdomen in greater detail and diagnose any abnormalities
Barium Meal Follow Through, Barium Swallow - for this study, the patient is made to swallow a drink that has barium in it, followed by taking x-rays of the digestive tract. This helps identify any abnormalities of the esophagus, stomach, or intestines.
A gastric emptying scan helps check the time taken by food particles to pass from the stomach to the intestines and can help identify reduced gastric motility.
Endoscopy, Colonoscopy - these are invasive tests in which a probe is inserted via the mouth (endoscopy) or the rectum (colonoscopy) to visualize the inner structures of the digestive tract in real-time.
Celebs affected
Bill Clinton
Former US president Bill Clinton has revealed that he was suffering from acid reflux during his stay in the White House
Prevention Of Indigestion

Although indigestion is a very common occurrence, certain lifestyle modifications can help prevent the condition as follows: . 
Eat fresh, home-cooked food, which is simple and easy to digest. Avoid eating fried and spicy food.
Eat smaller portions throughout the day rather than consuming large meals at once.
Limit the consumption of aerated beverages and caffeinated beverages.
Quit smoking and consumption of alcohol.
Avoid taking medications, such as NSAID painkillers, antibiotics, etc., for a longer duration than prescribed.
Perform light exercises, such as walking, after consuming heavy meals to help with the digestion process.
Drink plenty of water and fluids throughout the day.
Do not consume foods that cause allergies. 
  Indigestion is often neglected by many people as they consider it as a common issue which does not require much attention. That may be right to some extent as an occasional episode of indigestion is mostly harmless and can be fixed easily by simple home remedies. Here are some: Indian remedies to treat indigestion naturally.
Specialist To Visit

You must visit a doctor if indigestion becomes a chronic problem and/or is accompanied by one or more of the following symptoms:
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Blood in the stools
Change in the color or frequency of stools
Unexplained weight loss
Severe abdominal pain
Chest pain
In order to diagnose and treat the symptoms of indigestion, you need to visit:

General physician
Gastroenterologist
Treatment Of Indigestion

The treatment of indigestion aims to provide relief from symptoms and treat the underlying cause.

Symptomatic relief
Digestive enzymes and probiotics help relieve the symptoms of indigestion and improve the body’s digestive system. 
OTC preparations for gas, acidity and indigestion help provide immediate symptom relief.
Treatment of underlying cause
If symptoms of gas are due to an underlying cause, it is necessary to treat the causative condition to provide complete relief.

Mesalazine formulations are used to treat Crohn’s Disease and ulcerative colitis.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) like pantoprazole and omeprazole and H2 receptor blockers like famotidine and ranitidine can reduce stomach acid and may be recommended if you experience heartburn along with indigestion.
Antacids and prokinetic agents are used to treat gastroesophageal disease (GERD) and peptic ulcers.
Tegaserod preparations are useful in constipation and reduced movement of food from     the mouth which leads to symptoms of indigestion.
 Antibiotics like amoxicillin, clarithromycin & tetracycline are used to treat infections like   H. Pylori.
Tricyclic antidepressants are used to treat functional dyspepsia, a condition where the cause of dyspepsia is not apparent.
Home Care For Indigestion

Most often, symptoms of indigestion, such as abdominal pain, flatulence, or bloating can be managed at home with simple home remedies and lifestyle changes. Here is a list of things to follow in order to reduce indigestion-related problems:
Take OTC preparations to help with faster relief of symptoms.
Perform mild exercise, such as walking, as it helps with digestion and reduces bloating.
Gently massage the abdomen to reduce abdominal cramps and bloating.
Modify your diet by increasing the consumption of fiber-rich foods, such as fresh fruits and vegetables. Also, reduce the intake of fatty, spicy foods that are prime cause of indigestion.
Limit the consumption of alcohol, aerated, and caffeinated beverages.
Modify or reduce the use of medications, such as NSAIDs or painkillers.
Ginger, yoghurt, and papaya can fight indigestion
You can prevent indigestion from worsening if you avoid foods such as caffeine, high-fat diets, alcohol, and spicy foods. On the other hand, including certain foods in your diet like ginger, papaya, and yoghurt can help you to improve digestion and fight indigestion. Here is a list of few other foods you must include in the diet to fight digestive problems
Read To Know More!
Complications Of Indigestion

Indigestion does not cause any major complications on its own. The underlying disease, however, may worsen and cause health complications like:
  Ulceration and bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract due to worsening of GERD and peptic ulcer disease
Malnutrition due to the inability of the body to absorb nutrients
Increased risk of gastrointestinal cancers
Intestinal obstruction
 Alternative Therapies Of Indigestion

Apart from prescription medications and OTC preparations, there are alternative therapies that may help provide relief from chronic indigestion, such as -

Diet modifications
Diet rich in fresh fruits and vegetables can help benefit in relieving the symptoms of indigestion. Along with that, limiting the consumption of spicy foods, fatty foods, and foods that cause allergies helps improve the overall health of the digestive system. It is advisable to eat smaller portions throughout the day instead of eating larger meals all at one go. Also, to prevent indigestion, it is recommended to have a minimum gap of 2 hours between dinner and sleep time. Early dinner, followed by a short distance walk can aid digestion and also help you sleep better.

Exercise and yoga
Light exercises can help reduce abdominal discomfort, provide relief from symptoms, and improve digestion. You can do walking, simple whole body movements, light stretching, and Yoga Asanas. Paschimottanasana, Supta Baddha Konasana, Vajrasana, Pawanmuktasana are some yoga asanas suggested for digestive health.

Massage therapy
Gentle abdominal massage may help ease abdominal cramps and provide relief from constipation. You can massage your abdomen gently in circular movements, while lying down. Be careful not to exert heavy pressure as it may cause harm to the internal organs.

Ayurveda
Ayurveda suggests that indigestion or Ajirna Rog is caused when food is consumed without self-restraint. Bio cleansing therapies like Shodhana Chikitsa and Shamana Chikitsa help manage indigestion.

Natural herbs and spices, such as cinnamon (dalchini), carom (ajwain) seeds, cumin (jeera) seeds, ginger (adrak), asafoetida (hing), fenugreek (methi), etc., help build a strong digestive system and provide relief from flatulence and belching. You can use these herbs and spices in your meal preparations or even consume small quantities directly. Taking a pinch of asafoetida or carom seeds after a heavy meal or sucking on a piece of ginger candy or cinnamon stick can improve digestion. Medicinal preparations like Lahsunadi Vati and Hingavastaka Churna also help reduce indigestion.
Amla juice is good for indigestion
Amla juice not only helps in indigestion but also acts as an effective remedy in relieving acidity and heartburn. Take 15-20ml of amla juice and add equal amounts of water. Drink this amla juice every morning on an empty stomach for a healthy gut. Click here for more ayurvedic remedies for indigestion.
Click Here!
Living With Indigestion

Chronic indigestion may impose a lot of dietary restrictions for a patient. The person may not be able to enjoy or occasionally binge on fast foods or snacks. They may need to completely avoid eating food items if they suffer from any allergies such as lactose intolerance. 

Chronic indigestion may also cause problems such malnutrition as the patient may avoid eating meals. An acute episode of indigestion may leave the patient extremely weak and fatigued. If suffering from severe symptoms of indigestion such as prolonged nausea, excessive vomiting or diarrhoea, severe stomach cramping, etc., medical care must be sought promptly.

Additionally, here are a few tips which can help people with functional dyspepsia:
Your busy schedule rarely gives you a chance to relish your meals, making you eat fast and swallow without chewing thoroughly. Make sure to eat slowly and chew your food properly.
Always have your dinner 3 hours prior to bedtime. 
Ensure you take a small walk before climbing to bed.
Drink 1-2 liters of water throughout the day. This will dilute the acid in your tummy and help in better digestion.
Include a lot of fresh fruits and vegetables in your diet.
Get your daily dose of sleep because lack of sleep is also a key risk factor for stomach problems such as indigestion.
Frequently Asked Questions
Which foods can cause indigestion?
What is the difference between indigestion and acidity?
Is indigestion a serious illness?
What should I do if I have indigestion?
Can food allergies lead to indigestion?
References
Mahadeva S, Goh KL. Epidemiology of functional dyspepsia: a global perspective. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 May 7;12(17):2661-6.
Symptoms & Causes of Indigestion. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
Indigestion. NHS UK.
Madisch A, Andresen V, Enck P, Labenz J, Frieling T, Schemann M. The Diagnosis and Treatment of Functional Dyspepsia. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Mar 30;115(13):222-232.
Harmon RC, Peura DA. Evaluation and management of dyspepsia. Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2010 Mar;3(2):87-98.
Ford AC, Marwaha A, Sood R, et al. Global prevalence of, and risk factors for, uninvestigated dyspepsia: a meta-analysis Gut 2015;64:1049-1057.
Ajirna (Indigestion). National Health Portal India.
Ford AC, Marwaha A, Sood R, Moayyedi P. Global prevalence of, and risk factors for, uninvestigated dyspepsia: a meta-analysis.
Kim SE, Kim N, Lee JY, et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors of Functional Dyspepsia in Health Check-up Population: A Nationwide Multicenter Prospective Study. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2018;24(4):603-613.


===============================================


