Tetanus
Also known as Trismus and Lockjaw.
Overview

Tetanus, commonly known as lockjaw, is a nervous system disorder characterized by muscle spasms, particularly of the jaw and neck. This infection is caused by the bacteria called Clostridium tetani, which is found in the soil. Tetanus symptoms usually emerge about 7 to 10 days after the initial infection. However, this can vary from 4 days to about 3 weeks, and may, in some cases, may take months. 

Open wounds that are soiled, sharing contaminated needles and deliveries in unhygienic conditions are the main risk factors for getting tetanus. Most cases occur in people who did not complete their primary tetanus vaccination schedule or did not receive any booster shot within the previous decade. 

Tetanus is a deadly and highly debilitating condition that fortunately can be prevented by timely vaccinations. The tetanus vaccines should be given to children. Primary vaccination schedule consists of 5 tetanus shots given as part of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccination in children between 2 months to 6 years.
Key Facts
Usually seen in
All age groups
Gender affected
Both men and women
Body part(s) involved
Jaw and neck muscles
Prevalence
Worldwide: 73000 (2019)
Mimicking Conditions
Localized infections
Hysteria
Neoplasms
Malignant hyperthermia
Stimulant drugs
Dystonic drug effects
Serotonin syndrome
Stiff person syndrome
Treatment
Early wound care
Human tetanus immune globulin (TIG)
Medicines to control muscle spasms: Diazepam, Pancuronium, Baclofen, Magnesium sulfate
Antibiotics: Metronidazole, penicillin G, cefuroxime
Hospitalization and supportive care
Specialists to consult
General physicians
Toxicologist
Neurologist
Pulmonary medicine specialist
Anesthesiologist
Symptoms Of Tetanus

The most common sign of this infection is tightening of the jaw muscles. Tetanus infection can lead to serious health problems, including being unable to open the mouth and having trouble swallowing and breathing. Other symptoms include:

Jaw cramping
Sudden, involuntary muscle spasms often in the stomach
Painful muscle stiffness all over the body
Trouble swallowing
Seizures (jerking or staring)
Headache
Fever and sweating
Changes in blood pressure and heart rate
Did you know?
Spasm progressively extends to the facial muscles causing the typical facial expression of fixed sarcastic grimace and anxious expression called “ risus sardonicus”.
Causes Of Tetanus

Tetanus is caused by a toxin produced by Clostridium tetani bacteria spores found in dust, animal feces, and soil. When these spores enter a deep flesh wound, they transform into bacteria that release a lethal toxin known as tetanospasmin.

The toxin damages the muscles, specifically the motor neurons that control muscle function. This causes muscle spasms and stiffness, which is a major symptom of tetanus.

Tetanus cases are frequently seen in people who have never been immunized or in adults who have not received their 10-year booster shot. Tetanus is not a contagious disease and thus cannot be passed from person to person.

Other ways:
Tetanus bacteria can also infect someone’s body through breaks in the skin caused by:

Clean superficial wounds (when only the topmost layer of skin is scraped off)
Surgical procedures
Insect bites
Dental infections
Compound fractures (an exposed broken bone)
Chronic sores and infections
Intravenous (IV) drug use
Intramuscular injections (shots given in a muscle)
Types Of Tetanus

Tetanus is a vaccine-preventable disease acquired through environmental exposure to the spores of Clostridium tetani. There are four forms of tetanus, based on clinical findings. They include:
  1. Generalized tetanus
It is the most prevalent kind (more than 80% of reported cases). Typically, the head and neck muscles are the first to become tight and spastic, with the rest of the body eventually being affected. The full recovery from these spasms may take several months, and they can persist for up to 4 weeks.

2. Localized tetanus
It is an uncommon form of the disease in which patients have persistent contraction of muscles in the same body part as the injury. These contractions could last for several weeks before fading down gradually. 

3. Neonatal tetanus
It is a type of tetanus that manifests within a week of birth in newborn babies. In case the mother is not immune, neonatal tetanus affects newborns who are not protected by their own immune system or antibodies from the mother.

Note:  The newborn should receive human tetanus immunoglobulin (TIG) without delay. Also, it can be prevented by immunizing the mother before or during pregnancy or by ensuring a clean  delivery in a sterile environment..

4. Cerebral tetanus
It is also called cephalic tetanus which involves muscles of the face and larynx. It only affects the head's nerves and muscles. The most frequent cause of cephalic tetanus is head trauma. It is extremely uncommon, making up around 1% to 3% of tetanus cases.
Did you know?
A history of diphtheria or tetanus vaccinations is believed to be associated with less severe manifestations of COVID-19. Read more about the importance of vaccination in preventing many diseases.
Click Here
Risk Factors For Tetanus

Tetanus usually occurs in persons who are not immunized, partially immunized, or fully immunized but lack adequate booster doses. The risk factors for neonatal tetanus include the following:

1. Contaminated cuts or wounds 
Tetanus bacteria are more likely to infect certain breaks in the skin through feces (poop), or saliva (spit) and wounds caused by an object, like a nail or needle, breaking the skin.

2. Unvaccinated mother
Vaccination helps protect babies during this time when they are most vulnerable, women should get the tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccine (Tdap) during each pregnancy.

3. Delivery in contaminated areas
Obstetric tetanus, which occurs during pregnancy or within 6 weeks of the end of pregnancy. It happens following the contamination of wounds with Clostridium tetani spores during pregnancy or the use of contaminated tools during deliveries or abortions.

4. Septic cutting of the umbilical cord
Neonatal tetanus occurs when non sterile instruments are used to cut the umbilical cord or when contaminated material is used to cover the umbilical stump.

5. Family history
A history of neonatal tetanus in a previous child increases the risk for neonatal tetanus in subsequent children.

6. History of immunosuppression
Individuals who are on medications for autoimmune conditions or post-organ transplant have low immunity which can increase their chances of tetanus infections.

7. Sharing contaminated needles 
Skin punctures by contaminated needles (such as those used to inject illegal drugs or to tattoo or do body piercing) can also lead to tetanus.
  Got inked? Watch this video to learn about various precautions to follow after getting tattoos.


6. Diabetes
Patients who have diabetes and chronic wounds are more prone to tetanus than the other populations.
Did you know?
Overall, diabetics are more likely to contract tetanus than non-diabetics. Do not let diabetes impact your quality of life.
Check out our diabetic care range
Diagnosis Of Tetanus

No confirmatory laboratory testing is available; the diagnosis is made clinically. Other things to help confirm the diagnosis include:

1. History
When there is a history of a prior tetanus-prone injury and insufficient tetanus immunization, tetanus should be suspected in particular. Tetanus can be identified by a patient's recent history of trauma, wounds, scrapes, and punctures as well as by a doctor looking for specific symptoms and indicators.

2. Spatula test
The spatula test is a simple diagnostic test. Touching the throat with a spatula in normal patients elicits a gag reflex and efforts to expel the spatula; a negative result. If tetanus is present, a reflex spasm occurs, and the patient bites the spatula; a positive result.
Prevention Of Tetanus

Vaccination and good wound care are the cornerstones in the prevention of a tetanus infection. They are discussed as follows:

1. Vaccination
The only way to prevent a tetanus infection is by getting vaccinated on time. The tetanus vaccine shot is usually given in the deltoid muscle. The tetanus vaccine is given as part of the following vaccines:

Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine: Contains full doses of diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (whooping cough) vaccines. 
Diphtheria and tetanus (DT) vaccine
Tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine: Contains a full dose of the tetanus vaccine and a lower dose of diphtheria and whooping cough vaccines.
Tetanus and diphtheria (Td) vaccine
Tetanus Toxoid (TT) vaccine

Note: DTaP/DT are only given to babies and children younger than 7 years whereas Tdap/Td/TT are given to adolescents and adults.

Who should take tetanus vaccination and when?

Children
Children between 2 months to 6 years should get 5 DTaP shots. Three doses at 6, 10 & 14 weeks and two booster doses at 16-24 months and 5-6 years of age respectively.
Children who had a very bad reaction to DTaP can receive DT vaccine. However, they will not receive any protection against whooping cough.
Children 11-12 years should get 1 booster shot of Tdap.

Adults 
Adults over 18 years who did not receive primary immunization, three doses of Td vaccine are indicated. Two doses are administered at least 4 weeks apart, and the third dose is given 6-12 months after the second dose. The Tdap vaccine can substitute any one of the Td doses.
Adults who have completed their primary vaccination schedule, should get TT or Td shot every 10 years till the age of 65. One dose of Tdap vaccine may be administered in place of Tt/Td vaccine. 

Pregnant women
The national immunization schedule in India recommends the 2 doses of TT/Td regardless of the immunization status of pregnant women. There should be a minimum gap of 4 weeks between the two doses. Tdap vaccination can also be considered instead of the second dose of TT/Td injection.
If a mother received 2 TT/Td doses in the last pregnancy and gets pregnant within 3 years then only one booster dose is recommended.

Contraindications of Tetanus vaccination
History of a severe adverse reaction to any vaccination ingredient.
If within seven days following vaccination and without apparent explanation, suffered encephalopathy (such as coma, diminished level of consciousness, or persistent seizures).
History of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)

Immunization is one of the most effective tools to prevent severe infections in kids as well as adults. Know more about 7 vaccinations to protect against deadly diseases.
Read now


2. Appropriate wound care
You need to take proper care if you get any cut, wound or injury especially if it is contaminated. 
Here are a few tips that you need to follow if you have a minor wound or injury:

Control bleeding: Use a clean tissue, piece of gauze, or clean cloth to apply direct pressure to the cut or wound until bleeding stops. To aid in reducing bleeding, try to elevate the arm or leg above the heart if possible. 
Maintain hygiene: First of all, wash your hands before cleaning and dressing the wound. Once the bleeding has stopped, a saline solution, bottled water, or clear running water should be used to rinse the wound.
Cover the wound: Use a sterile bandage after using an antibiotic cream to lower the chance of infection. To keep the wound clean and dry, change the bandage frequently as it will keep harmful bacteria out.
Change the dressing: Replace the bandage at least once every day, or whenever the dressing is soiled or wet, and change the dressing. You can use an antibiotic ointment.
Manage adverse reactions: If you observe any rash or wound getting worse due to antibiotic use or if you are allergic to the adhesive used in bandages switch to adhesive-free dressings or sterile gauze and paper tape.

Watch this informative video to know more about how to manage wounds efficiently.
Specialists To Visit

The following specialists help to reduce morbidity and mortality associated with tetanus:

General physician
Toxicologist
Neurologist
Pulmonary medicine specialist
Anesthesiologist

A toxicologist helps to rule out any poisoning and to determine if any substance is toxic or harmful. 
A neurologist is a doctor who treats diseases of nerves and in the case of tetanus, they treat seizures. 
A pulmonary medicine specialist can help when there is respiratory compromise and can help with providing ventilation.
An anesthesiologist is to administer drugs, such as baclofen.

When to see a doctor?

You are not sure about completing your tetanus vaccination schedule.
You haven't received a tetanus injection in the last ten years.
Not sure when the last tetanus vaccination was taken.
You are injured outdoors.
The wound has been in direct contact with soil.
The wound has dirt or debris that won’t come out.
A deep puncture wound, an object in the wound, an animal bite, or a severe cut.

Do not wait until things get out of hand. Seek advice from our trusted team of world-class doctors.
Book your appointment now
Treatment Of Tetanus

Tetanus is a medical emergency and its management comprises the following:

1. Early and aggressive wound debridement
It is advisable to surgically debride any wounds that are present. It's essential to clean your wound with sterile or clean water and an antiseptic solution to get rid of any dirt, debris, or foreign objects that could harbor bacteria. 

Always keep your first aid kit handy in case of an emergency.
Buy first aid products online


2. Antimicrobial therapy
Although they are always advised, antibiotics probably only have a little part to play in the treatment of tetanus. It is crucial to note that without proper wound debridement, appropriate antibiotic therapy may fall short of eliminating C. tetani. Drugs used are:
Metronidazole 
Penicillin G
Cefuroxime

3. Human tetanus immune globulin (HTIG)
Neutralization of unbound toxins with Human tetanus immune globulin is given. All patients with suspected tetanus should immediately receive both passive (with TIG) and active (tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines). 

4. Drugs to control muscle spasms
Generalized muscle spasms are life-threatening since they can cause respiratory failure, lead to aspiration, and induce generalized exhaustion in the patient. 

Note: Long-term muscle contractions result in abrupt, strong, and painful muscle group contractions. It's known as tetany. This is called tetany. These are the episodes that can cause fractures and muscle tears.

There are several drugs that may be used to control these spasms which include:

Benzodiazepines (like diazepam)
Pancuronium
Antispasmodics (like baclofen)
Magnesium sulfate


5. Hospitalization and supportive care
People with severe tetanus need to stay in an intensive care environment. As sedatives inhibit breathing you might need to stay under ventilation temporarily. 
Nutritional support should also be initiated early. As the energy demands in tetanus can be extremely high due to repeated spasms, excessive sweating, muscular contractions etc.
Heparin or any other anticoagulant should be administered early in order to prevent blood clotting in veins.
Tetanus often begins with mild spasms in the jaw muscles, which eventually can affect your chest, neck, back, and abdominal muscles. Hence, physical therapy is suggested as soon as spasms have stopped.

6. Vaccination during recovery
Tetanus disease does not provide immunity against tetanus. Active immunization should be initiated or continued with a tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine as soon as the person’s condition has stabilized.

Order medicines online from India's largest pharmacy
Click Here
Complications Of Tetanus

Serious health problems that can happen because of tetanus include:

● Laryngospasm: It is uncontrolled/involuntary tightening of the vocal cords that may lead to interference with breathing. 


● Fractures: Fractures of the spine or long bones may result from involuntary muscle movements. 


● Hypertension and/or abnormal heart rhythm: Hyperactivity seen in tetanus may lead to hypertension. It can also cause abnormal heart rhythm. 


● Nosocomial infections: These are infections that are acquired while getting medical care but were absent at the time of admission. They are also known as healthcare-associated infections (HAI).


● Pulmonary embolism: It refers to a blood clot that has passed through the bloodstream from another part of the body and blocked the major artery of the lung or one of its branches. 


● Aspiration pneumonia: It is a lung infection that develops when things like saliva or vomit accidentally go into the lungs. 


● Death: Tetanus can be fatal in some cases.These mostly include people 60 years of age or older and those who have never received a vaccination.
Did you know?
There has been a 96% reduction in tetanus cases since 1988, largely due to scaled-up immunization programmes.
Read more on tetanus toxoid vaccination.
Alternative Therapies For Tetanus

A few alternative therapies that have shown some promise in the management of tetanus include:

1. Botulinum toxin
Botulinum toxin, also called “miracle poison,” is a neurotoxin produced by the bacterium Clostridium botulinum. Studies show that other than immunization, the administration of this toxin is a treatment approach that has been used in recent years to reduce rigidity and spasms in tetanus patients. 

2. Vitamin C
Research suggests that vitamin C might play an important role in preventing tetanus and reducing mortality. It also acts as an antioxidant, helps wound healing and enhances immunity.

Check out our broad range of vitamin C supplements to fill any gaps in your diet.
Browse Here
Living With Tetanus

Tetanus can have various adverse effects on the patient's lifestyle, depending on the severity of the symptoms. The challenge or ease of living with tetanus varies for each survivor, subject to the availability of medical care and rehabilitation opportunities and their family and social support. Various forms of rehabilitation and support include:

Physical therapy can also be used to help with muscle rigidity and spasms, increase mobility and movement and maximize function and quality of life.
Cardiopulmonary physical therapy can be used to help in the prevention of respiratory complications.
Emotional and caretaking are also required by the person dealing with tetanus. A helping hand or support from the family on the emotional ground can do wonders in recovery. 

Caregivers play a very important role in the overall disease outcome of the patient diagnosed with tetanus. The different roles of the nurse and include the following responsibilities:

Recording medical information.
Creating care plans to suit the individual needs of the patient.
Combative wound care and infection control.
Providing emotional support so that the patient does not feel alone. 
Frequently Asked Questions
How does a person contract tetanus?
Does the protection from tetanus vaccination last forever?
How long does a tetanus shot last?
What will happen if I forget to take a tetanus shot after being cut by a rusty metal?
What is a booster dose or booster vaccine or booster shot?
Is there a cure for tetanus?
How long does it take to show signs of tetanus after being exposed?
What if I miss a dose of tetanus toxoid?
References
NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Yen LM, Thwaites CL. Tetanus [Internet]. The Lancet. Elsevier; 2019 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Define_me. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Rodrigo C, Fernando D, Rajapakse S. Pharmacological management of tetanus: An evidence-based review - critical care [Internet]. BioMed Central. BioMed Central; 2014 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus journal articles and Manuals [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus - researchgate.net [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus - azdhs.gov [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus symptoms and complications [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Causes and how it spreads [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Screening for endocrine hypertension - mdedge [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Brown D. Spatula test [Internet]. RCEMLearning India. 2019 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus [Internet]. World Health Organization. World Health Organization; [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Behrens H, Ochmann S, Dadonaite B, Roser M. Tetanus [Internet]. Our World in Data. 2019 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus vaccination [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis vaccine recommendations [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
(PDF) tetanus: A review of the literature - researchgate.net [Internet]. [cited 2022Dec2]. Available from:
Tetanus: Questions and answers - immunize.org [Internet]. [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
Tetanus [Internet]. World Health Organization. World Health Organization; [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care. National Immunisation Program schedule [Internet]. Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care. Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care; 2023 [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
T; HHK. Vitamin C for preventing and treating tetanus [Internet]. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. U.S. National Library of Medicine; [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
Pinkbook: Tetanus [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
An alternative treatment approach in tetanus: Botulinum toxin [Internet]. [cited 2023Mar6]. Available from:
Tetanus (no date) Physiopedia. Available at:


===============================================


