Appendicitis
Overview
Appendix is a small, closed-ended, narrow pouch that projects from the large intestine. Inflammation of the appendix is referred to as appendicitis and worldwide is the most common reason for emergency abdominal surgery.

The condition usually presents as severe stomach pain that starts around the belly button and later moves to the lower right abdomen. Appendix can rupture in some cases, which should be treated as a medical emergency. 

Appendicitis seems to develop by obstruction at the opening of the appendix. The major risk factors that can contribute to appendicitis are constipation, infections, some bowel conditions, and having a strong family history.

Appendicitis is mostly treated by surgical removal of the appendix and is increasingly done as a laparoscopic procedure. Antibiotics are prescribed to manage wound infections.
Symptoms Of Appendicitis
  The most important symptom of appendicitis is:
Sudden pain that starts around the belly button and frequently moves to the lower right abdomen. 
Initially, the pain is diffused and not confined to one spot. Most individuals indicate the location of the pain with a circular motion of their hand around the central part of their abdomen.
With time, the pain may get localized to the right lower abdomen, and the patient may be able to pinpoint the exact location of the pain.
  Other symptoms of the condition include:
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Vomiting
Constipation
Diarrhea
Bloating 
Indigestion
Swelling in the abdomen
Abdominal pain that becomes worse as you cough, sneeze, walk, or perform other actions
Low-grade fever with chills
Inability to pass gas
Painful and frequent urination
Difficulty rising from lying position
Anxiety
Headache
Dizziness
Anorexia (an eating disorder where the individual do not eat to avoid weight gain)
Suffering from severe stomach ache?
There could be several reasons for this. Do not simply swallow a tablet on your own. Here's a simple guide to when you should see a doctor for stomach pain.
Know More
Causes Of Appendicitis
  The cause of appendicitis is usually blockage of the opening of the appendix. The potential causes of blockage include:
Appendicoliths (hardened rock-like mucus or stools) 
Lymphatic tissue growth
Infections
Benign or malignant tumors

As the blockage occurs, bacteria that are normally found within the appendix begin to multiply and invade the wall of the appendix. The body's immune response to this bacterial invasion results in inflammation of the appendix.
Types of Appendicitis

Appendicitis can be classified based on its onset into the following types:
Acute appendicitis
It begins with normal abdominal pain and then pain migrates to the lower right abdomen. The pain intensifies very fast within a few days to hours. It requires immediate medical attention or surgery, as it can develop more fatal complications if left untreated.
Chronic appendicitis
When inflammation of the appendix lasts for a longer duration, it is termed chronic appendicitis. The symptoms are milder than disappear and reappear constantly. Sometimes, this makes it challenging for doctors to diagnose it early.
Risk Factors Of Appendicitis
  Appendicitis can affect anyone. But some people may be more likely to develop this condition than others which includes the following factors:
Age: The majority of appendicitis cases occur during 20s and 30s.
Gender: Males are more prone to develop appendicitis than females.
Family history: People with a family history of appendicitis are more likely to develop it.
Constipation: Prolonged constipation can block the appendix which can lead to appendicitis.
  Suffering from constipation? Listen to our expert talk about the treatment of constipation with the help of Ayurvedic medicines.

Other conditions: Chronic bowel diseases such as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis can increase the chances of getting appendicitis.
Air pollution: Research demonstrates a link between air pollution and increased risk of appendicitis. It might be possible because air pollution can increase the susceptibility to bacterial and viral infections and can increase intestinal inflammation.
Did you know?
Air purifiers, indoor plants, and wearing masks are not the only things that help you combat air pollution. Learn about certain food items that will help to fight air pollution and protect your family. 
Click To Read
Diagnosis Of Appendicitis

The symptoms of appendicitis are very similar to many other conditions. So, it is essential to distinguish between these diseases through specific clinical tests along with physical examination. They include:
Medical history
A detailed medical history is taken to rule out the possibility of other health conditions. A history of abdominal pain for the last 12-24 hours without fever or diarrhea that migrates to the lower right side of the stomach along with tenderness. You might be asked about the starting of your symptoms, along with ongoing medicines for any other disease.
Physical examination
To diagnose appendicitis, your doctor will perform a physical test. You might be asked to pinpoint the area of the abdomen where you feel the pain. The doctor will apply gentle pressure on the painful area to check the abdominal rigidity and a tendency for you to stiffen your abdominal muscles in response to pressure over the inflamed appendix.

Note: The physical examination may be unrevealing in the very early stages of appendicitis and the signs and symptoms might be subtle.
Imaging tests
These tests show whether the abdominal pain is caused by any obstruction inside the appendix, an enlarged or burst appendix, inflammation, an abscess, or something else. They include:
Abdominal ultrasound: Abdominal ultrasonography uses sound waves to produce an image of internal organs, without the use of X-rays or radiation.  It is a widely used primary measure to evaluate patients with acute abdominal pain. 
Abdominal Computerized tomography (CT): CT scans use X-rays to produce internal images. An abdominal CT scan has greater than 95% accuracy for the diagnosis of appendicitis.
Abdominal Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): MRI Scan uses strong magnetic and radio waves to create detailed and clear 3D images of the body's internal organs. However, performing an abdominal MRI is expensive and also demands a high level of expertise to interpret the results.

Note: In order to reduce radiation exposure, it is recommended for pregnant women and children to undergo an ultrasound or MRI instead of a CT scan.

Abdominal x-rays: Abdominal X-rays do not have a role in diagnosis of acute appendicitis, but in some cases appendicoliths may be visible on it.
Barium enema test: This can assist in identifying appendicitis in patients with atypical symptoms. It can detect signs of inflammation in the appendix, as well as other abnormalities in the colon or pelvis. 
Laboratory tests
Complete blood count (CBC): Your doctor will recommend a CBC to check for a high white blood cell count, which could be a sign of infection. 
C-reactive protein test: This test is recommended to check any other causes of abdominal inflammation such as autoimmune disorders.
Urine and stool test: Urinalysis and stool test is done for diagnosis of any infection, inflammation, kidney stone that is causing pain.

Get the most advanced, safe, and effective lab results from the comfort of your house.
Click Here To Book
Other tests

Diagnostic laparoscopy: It is a medical procedure used by doctors to visually examine the abdomen and pelvis when other imaging techniques are not able to identify the cause of pain or growth in these areas. 
Prevention Of Appendicitis

One of the major risk factors for appendicitis is constipation. Though appendicitis cannot be prevented there are certain dietary modifications that can prevent constipation.

Foods to eat
Fresh fruits like apple, orange, lime, strawberries, papaya, banana,  muskmelon, guava, pineapple, mango, blueberries, avocado, apricots, & peaches.
Legumes like green gram, lentils, sprouts, yellow lentils, green lentils, & chickpeas.
Vegetables like carrot, ladyfinger, bottle gourd, snake gourd, beetroot, cucumber, potatoes, capsicum, cauliflower, squashes, green leafy vegetables, kale, spinach, cabbage & beetroot.
Whole wheat flour
Brown rice
  Foods to avoid
Processed, packaged, fried, and junk foods 
All purpose flour (maida)
Red meat 
Cakes, pastries, and other sugary items 
Carbonated drinks & canned packed juices.

Note: Remember to get adequate water intake, regular exercise, and keep an arm's distance from alcohol consumption and smoking.

Check out our wide range of products to manage constipation.
Explore Now


Specialist To Visit
  The doctors who can assess the severity of the patient and formulate a treatment plan include:
General physician
Gastrointestinal (GI) specialist
General surgeon

Your general physician will examine your symptoms and abdomen. If they confirm a diagnosis, they may refer you to a specialist who can perform surgery to remove the appendix and prevent future problems. This specialist may be a gastrointestinal specialist or a general surgeon, both of whom have the expertise to perform appendectomy (Appendix removal).
  Consult with India's leading doctors online for all the medical care and guidance you require.
Click Now

Treatment Of Appendicitis
  The most effective and common treatment for appendicitis is surgical removal of the appendix. The exact function of the appendix is unknown and the best and safest option to treat an inflamed appendix is its removal. However, studies also show that certain cases can be managed through non-surgical options. Management of appendicitis include:
Surgical management
Treatment of appendicitis generally involves surgery to remove the inflamed appendix, which is known as appendectomy Surgery to remove your appendix can be performed in the following ways:
Open appendectomy: It is a surgical procedure in which a single 5-10 centimeters long incision in the lower-right abdominal area removes an appendix. This type of appendectomy is suggested if the appendix has ruptured and the infection has spread.
Laparoscopic appendectomy: The surgeon makes up to three tiny incisions in the belly to insert a laparoscope, which is a camera and light attached to a thin tube that allows the surgeon to observe the abdomen internally. After identifying the appendix, it is stitched up and removed. Laparoscopic procedures are preferred due to fewer complications and a quicker recovery period.

Here are a few tips to follow post-surgery. Post-operative care includes:
Keep the incision site clean with water and gentle soap
Change the dressing as and when suggested by the doctor
Limit your physical activity and do not lifting any heavy objects
Drink plenty of water and fluids and adding more fiber to ease constipation
Do not strain the abdominal muscles by climbing stairs or doing exercise that involves stomach 
Ask your doctor about when is safe to return to your regular job, and about the follow up visits
Keeping a check on your symptoms. Contact your doctor immediately if you experience severe pain, fever, and pus formation near your incision or severe vomiting.
Medications
1. Most treatment strategies include an initial course of intravenous antibiotics for 1-3 days, followed by oral antibiotics for 7 days.The most common antibiotics used are:
Cefotaxime
Ampicillin
Sulbactam
2. Some analgesics (painkillers) such as acetaminophen may be given to manage severe pain. 

Trying to get all your medications on time, but unable to find them. Well, don’t worry. Order your medicines with Tata 1mg for guaranteed delivery.
Upload Your Prescription
Home-care For Appendicitis
  Acute appendicitis is a sudden medical issue that requires urgent treatment and surgery.. However, the following natural and herbal remedies may help alleviate the symptoms associated with appendicitis:
Ginseng tea: Ginseng possesses anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. It can help relieve pain associated with appendicitis.
Mint essence: May be able to lessen the discomfort associated with appendicitis. Every three to four hours, add 2 to 3 drops of mint essence to water and consume.
Basil (Tulsi): If the appendicitis patient has a fever, basil leaves can be used to make a decoction because they have antipyretic properties 
Fenugreek (Methi): High fiber content of fenugreek may aid in reducing constipation, which makes it potentially useful in managing appendicitis.
Yogurt (Dahi): Probiotics like yogurt may prove effective in preventing bacterial growth in the appendix. Therefore consuming 2 tablespoons of yogurt once a day is beneficial as it treats inflammation and pain to a huge extent.
Ginger (Adrak): It is famous for its therapeutic benefits. Its anti-inflammatory and detoxifying properties have the potential to provide major health benefits. Mix 1 teaspoon (tsp) of ginger juice, half a tsp of turmeric, and 1 tsp of honey. Drink this mixture twice a day. This may help you to reduce swelling, nausea, and other symptoms of appendicitis.
Complications Of Appendicitis
  The serious problem with appendicitis is the risk of a bursting appendix and causing life-threatening infections. This may happen if the appendix is not treated and removed quickly and can cause complications, including:
Peritonitis: After the appendix bursts, the thin layer of tissue inside the abdomen becomes swollen and infected with bacteria. This can cause severe, continuous pain in the whole abdomen, known as peritonitis.
Abscess: An abscess is a painful collection of pus around the ruptured appendix that is usually caused by a bacterial infection. It is managed with antibiotics to clear the infection and surgical drainage of pus.
Sepsis: Pus and infection caused by a ruptured abscess might travel through the bloodstream to other body parts. It is a rare but severe condition that can lead to tissue damage, organ failure, and death.
Thrombophlebitis: It is an uncommon and serious illness involving the inflammation of the wall of a vein associated with a blood clot. 
Appendicular mucocele: This refers to a swollen appendix filled with mucus, which is usually caused by the growth of cells, inflammation, or blockage.
Recurrent appendicitis: It is seen when the appendix is only partially removed resulting in recurrent inflammation of the remaining appendix.
Complications post-surgery
After the removal of the appendix, certain complications can arise, which include:
Healing with scar formation
Intestinal adhesion and obstructions
Frequently Asked Questions
Is appendicitis treatable without surgery?
What is the best pain relief medicine for the appendix?
What is the recovery time for appendicitis?
Which fruits are good for the appendix?
Do you gain weight after appendix surgery?
Key Facts
Usually seen in
Second and third decades of life
Gender affected
Both men and women but more common in men
Body part(s) involved
Appendix 
Abdomen
Prevalence
Global: 6.7 to 8.6% (2023)
India
Mimicking Conditions
Gastroenteritis
Crohn’s ileitis
Ulcerative colitis
Urinary tract infection
Kidney infection
Kidney stones
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
Endometriosis
Ectopic pregnancy
Necessary health tests/imaging
Imaging tests: Abdominal ultrasound, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and Computerized tomography (CT).

Laboratory tests: Complete blood count (CBC), C-reactive protein test, Urinalysis, Stool test, and Diagnostic laparoscopy.
Treatment
Surgical management: Open appendectomy and Laparoscopic appendectomy
Antibiotics: Cefotaxime, Ampicillin, and Sulbactam.

See All
References
Synonyms of appendicitis.Epityphlitis.Dovemed. Published online 16th Mar. 2018.
T Buckius , Brian McGrath, John Monk, Rod Grim, Theodore Bell, Vanita Ahuja. Changing epidemiology of acute appendicitis in the United States: study period 1993-2008. Published online 9th Aug. 2011.
Kai-Biao Lin, K. Robert Lai, Nan-Ping Yang, Chien-Lung Chan, Yuan-Hung Liu, Ren-Hao Pan & Chien-Hsun Huang.Epidemiology and socioeconomic features of appendicitis in Taiwan: a 12-year population-based study. Published online 17th Sep. 2015.
J. Drescher, Shannon Marcotte, Robert Grant. Family History Is a Predictor for Appendicitis in Adults in the Emergency Department. Published online 13th Dec. 2012.
Pittman-Waller VA, Myers JG, Stewart RM, et al. Appendicitis: why so complicated? Analysis of 5755 consecutive appendectomies. Am Surg. 2000;66:548–554. Published online June 2000.
Gilaad G. Kaplan, Divine Tanyingoh, Elijah Dixon, Markey Johnson, Amanda J. Wheeler, Robert P. Myers, Stefania Bertazzon, Vineet Saini, Karen Madsen, Subrata Ghosh, and Paul J. Villeneuve. Ambient Ozone Concentrations and the Risk of Perforated and Nonperforated Appendicitis: A Multicity Case-Crossover Study. Published online 1st Aug. 2013.
Francesc Simó Alari, Israel Gutierrez, and Judit Gimenéz Pérez.Familial history aggregation on acute appendicitis. Published online 19 Oct. 2017.
Thomas H. Louis, and Daniel F. Felter. Mucocele of the appendix. Published online 27 Jan. 2014.
Mark W. Jones; Richard A. Lopez; Jeffrey G. Deppen. Appendicitis.[ Updated 2022 Oct. 24]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls.
Kurosh Paya. Appendicitis. Pediatric surgery diagnosis and management. Edition-1. Available online 2008 Jan. In: Researchgate.
Cem Cahit Barışık and Abdulbari Bener. Predictors risk factors for acute complex appendicitis pain in patients: Are there gender differences? Published online 2020 Jun 30.
Lari Warjri, B.A. Home Remedies for Appendicitis. The Medindia Medical Review Team. Updated on Oct 21, 2022.
Planet Ayurveda. Home Remedies for Appendicitis. Available online 2019, May 1st.
Peter Becker, Stefan Fichtner-Feigl, and Dieter Schilling. Clinical Management of Appendicitis. Clinical Therapeutic Review. Published online 24 Nov. 2018.
5. Shaoul R, Rimar Y, Toubi A, Mogilner J, Polak R, Jaffe M. Crohn's disease and recurrent appendicitis: a case report. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Nov 21;11(43):6891-3.
Connor TJ, Garcha IS, Ramshaw BJ, et al. Diagnostic laparoscopy for suspected appendicitis. Am Surg. 1995;61(2):187-189.
Guan et al. The global, regional, and national burden of appendicitis in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. BMC Gastroenterology (2023) 3:44.
Seyed Mohsen Mousavi,Shahram Paydar, Sedigheh Tahmasebi, and Leila Ghahramani. The Effects of Intravenous Acetaminophen on Pain and Clinical Findings of Patients with Acute Appendicitis; A Randomized Clinical Trial. Published online 2014.
Dimitrios Moris, Erik Karl Paulson, and Theodore N Pappas. Diagnosis and Management of Acute Appendicitis in Adults: A Review. The Journal of the American Medical Association. Published online December 14, 2021.
Appendicitis. Foods to Avoid With Appendicitis.Chandigarh Ayurved & Panchakarma Centre. Updated online 22nd June 2023.


===============================================


