Should A2B 40mg Tablet be taken in the morning or at night?
A2B 40mg Tablet is generally recommended to be taken once daily, either in the morning or in the evening.
Consider taking it at the same time each day as it will help you to remember taking it.
How long does it take for A2B 40mg Tablet to work?
You may see an improvement within a few days.
But, the maximum benefit can be seen within 4-8 weeks of starting treatment.
My blood pressure is now controlled.
Can I stop taking A2B 40mg Tablet now?
No, do not stop taking A2B 40mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if your blood pressure is controlled.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your blood pressure which could be detrimental for you.
A2B 40mg Tablet does not cure high blood pressure but controls it.
So, you may have to take the medicine lifelong.
Talk to your doctor if you have any concerns.
If I have some kidney problem, can I take A2B 40mg Tablet? Can it further deteriorate my kidney function?
You can take A2B 40mg Tablet if it has been advised by your doctor.
Your doctor may ask you to get regular tests done (potassium and creatinine levels) in order to monitor your kidney function.
A2B 40mg Tablet may cause worsening of kidney function, therefore you should contact your doctor in case you notice swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands or unexplained weight gain.
I am overweight and the doctor has prescribed me A2B 40mg Tablet for blood pressure control.
I am bothered that A2B 40mg Tablet can increase my weight.
No, do not worry since A2B 40mg Tablet is not known to cause weight gain.
In fact in animal studies A2B 40mg Tablet has been found to decrease fat tissue.
Does A2B 40mg Tablet affect blood glucose levels in diabetics?
A2B 40mg Tablet may lower blood glucose levels in patients with diabetes.
Therefore, it is essential to keep a regular track of your blood glucose levels.
Talk to your doctor if you are a diabetic because the dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines may need adjustment.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aabis-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aabis-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aabis-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

How long does Aacef T 1000mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Aacef T 1000mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aacef T 1000mg/125mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Aamont-LC Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Aamont-LC Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Aamont-LC Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Aamont-LC Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Aamont-LC Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aamont-LC Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aamont-LC Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Aamont-LC Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Aamont-LC Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Aamont-LC Tablet.
=

What is Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Sulfamethoxazole+Trimethoprim.
It is an antibiotic used to treat certain bacterial infections and works by stopping the growth of the bacteria causing the infection.
It treats urinary tract infections, ear infections, enteritis (inflammation of the small intestine), pneumonia, traveler's diarrhea, and episodes of difficulty breathing in people with chronic (long-term) bronchitis.
Is it safe to use Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
Yes, Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet is safe to use in most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted common side effects like Nausea, Vomiting, Skin rash, Allergic reaction.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods.
If you start to experience vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Try small frequent sips of the liquid.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent vomiting and signs of dehydration like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet is contraindicated in patients with known allergy to any of the component or excipients of this medicine and in patients with a history of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia (low platelet count), megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.
The medicine is also contraindicated in pediatric patients less than 2 months of age and in patients with marked hepatic damage or with severe renal insufficiency when renal function status cannot be monitored.
What should be avoided while taking the Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
It is advised to not skip the dose.
Skipping doses or not completing the full course of the medicine can decrease its effectiveness and can lead to the growth of bacteria that are resistant to the effects of it.
Does Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet expire?
Yes, Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet does expire.
The expiry date is written on the pack of the medicine and it refers to the last day of the month mentioned.
Do not use Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet after the expiry date.
What is Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Sulfamethoxazole and Trimethoprim.
It is an antibiotic which treats certain bacterial infections and works by stopping the growth of the bacteria causing the infection.
Can the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aanprim DS 800mg/160mg Tablet?
=

What if I give too much of Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Aarcim 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

What is Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet?
Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet?
Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet?
The use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aardom D 30mg/10mg Tablet?
=

What is Aarflu 150mg Tablet used for?
Aarflu 150mg Tablet is an antifungal medicine.
It is used for the treatment of many fungal infections like Cryptococcal meningitis (fungal infection in the brain) and Coccidioidomycosis (a disease of the lungs).
Additionally, it is helpful in the treatment of infections caused by Candida found in the bloodstream, body organs (e.g., heart, lungs) or urinary tract, mucosal thrush (infection affecting the lining of the mouth, throat, and denture sore mouth), and genital thrush (infection of the vagina or penis).
It can also be used to treat skin infections like athlete's foot, ringworm, jock itch, nail infection.
Can Aarflu 150mg Tablet be taken with oral contraceptives (OCPs) or birth control pills?
Aarflu 150mg Tablet has been reported to have a minor interaction when taken with estradiol (a component of oral contraceptives).
It can increase the level or effect of estradiol when given along with it.
Before starting the treatment with Aarflu 150mg Tablet inform your doctor if you are taking birth control pills.
Can Aarflu 150mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Aarflu 150mg Tablet may cause hair loss as a rare side effect.
If during the treatment you experience hair loss, inform your doctor.
Yes, Aarflu 150mg Tablet is effective when used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aarflu 150mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Is Aarflu 150mg Tablet fungistatic or fungicidal?
Aarflu 150mg Tablet is primarily fungistatic which means it controls the growth of fungus).
However, it may also act as a fungicidal (kills fungus) medicine against certain organisms, specifically Cryptococcus in a dose-dependent manner, specifically Cryptococcus.
Does Aarflu 150mg Tablet treat urinary tract infection (UTI)?
Aarflu 150mg Tablet is used to treat urinary tract infections (UTI) caused mainly by Candida.
However, bacteria growth can also cause UTI in some cases.
If you are suffering from UTI, please consult your doctor as the cause of infection (fungal or bacterial, or other) needs to be identified before the start of any treatment.
=

How long can I take Aaron 100mg Injection for?
Aaron 100mg Injection is used to regulate hemoglobin levels in the human body.
It is usually given to patients who have iron deficient anemia or iron deficiency.
The doctor may suggest using this medicine till the hemoglobin level becomes normal.
Do consult your doctor to understand the usage of this medicine properly.
How is Aaron 100mg Injection administered?
Aaron 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Aaron 100mg Injection.
Can I take Aaron 100mg Injection for anemia and iron deficiency?
Yes, Aaron 100mg Injection can be taken for iron deficiency anemia and iron deficiency.
However, its use for other types of anemia is not recommended.
Take Aaron 100mg Injection in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
What types of food items should I take other than Aaron 100mg Injection?
You can consume food items that are rich in iron content (like red meat, pork, poultry and seafood).
Other food items which contain rich iron content include beans, dark green leafy vegetables (like spinach), peas, dried fruit (raisins and apricots), iron-fortified cereals, breads and pastas.
You can also try iron supplements (tablets or capsules) available at pharmacy stores for iron deficient anemia.
Does Aaron 100mg Injection increase weight?
Yes, Aaron 100mg Injection can increase weight.
Exercise regularly and take a balanced diet that includes whole grains, fresh fruits, vegetables and fat-free products.
You should consult your doctor if you need any further help to manage your weight.
=

Aarticef 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Aarticef 500mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Aarticef 500mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Aarticef 500mg Injection?
Aarticef 500mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Aarticef 500mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Aarticef 500mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Aarticef 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Aarticef 500mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Aarticef 500mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Aarticef 500mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aarticef 500mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Aarticef 500mg Injection administered?
Aarticef 500mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Aarticef 500mg Injection.
=

Aasaz 500 Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Aasaz 500 Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Aasaz 500 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aasaz 500 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Aasaz 500 Tablet be taken at night?
Aasaz 500 Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Aasaz 500 Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Aasaz 500 Tablet to work?
Aasaz 500 Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
=

What is Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
Can the use of Aaxy CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Abamax 25mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Abamax 25mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Abamax 25mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Abamax 25mg Tablet?
Abamax 25mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Abamax 25mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Abamax 25mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Abamax 25mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Abamax 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Abamax 25mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Abamax 25mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Abamax 25mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Abamax 25mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Abamax 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

Who should not use Abart 60mg Injection?
Use of Abart 60mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Abart 60mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Abart 60mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Abart 60mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Abart 60mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like a kidney- or heart-related problem.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Abart 60mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Abart 60mg Injection administered?
Abart 60mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

Can Abatitor 250mg Tablet cure prostate cancer?
Abatitor 250mg Tablet does not cure cancer but helps in prolonging and improving the life of the patient.
Moreover, when prostate cancer is treated with Abatitor 250mg Tablet then the frequency of fractures is relatively less.
Similarly, the increase in pain is less common with Abatitor 250mg Tablet.
Is Abatitor 250mg Tablet a chemotherapy drug?
Abatitor 250mg Tablet is a hormonal treatment not a chemotherapy drug.
It is used to treat prostate cancer in adult men that has spread to other parts of the body.
Abatitor 250mg Tablet stops your body from making testosterone.
This can slow down the growth of prostate cancer.
Why do I need to take prednisolone with Abatitor 250mg Tablet?
Your doctor will always prescribe prednisolone with Abatitor 250mg Tablet.
Taking these two medicines together lowers the risk of getting high blood pressure, fluid retention (having too much water in your body), or having reduced levels of potassium in your blood, which can occur due to Abatitor 250mg Tablet.
Does Abatitor 250mg Tablet affect liver?
Abatitor 250mg Tablet can cause severe liver problems.
In very rare cases, Abatitor 250mg Tablet may even cause failure of the liver to function (called acute liver failure), which can even lead to death.
Tell your doctor if you experience yellowing of the skin or eyes, darkening of the urine, or severe nausea or vomiting, as these could be signs or symptoms of liver problems.
How frequently should the liver investigations be done?
Liver enzymes should be measured prior to starting the treatment, every two weeks for the first three months into the treatment, and monthly thereafter.
If you develop clinical symptoms or signs suggestive of liver toxicity, liver enzymes should be measured immediately.
If the liver enzyme levels are increased beyond certain levels, your doctor may temporarily discontinue the treatment with Abatitor 250mg Tablet.
How to take Abatitor 250mg Tablet?
=

Can the use of Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet?
Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Cefpodoxime and Clavulanic acid.
This medication is used to treat bacterial infection.
This medication works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infection.
Can the use of Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet cause any serious side effects?
Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet may cause serious side effects in very few patients (less than 1 in 1,000).
Inform the doctor straight away if you get bloody diarrhea, yellowing of the eyes and skin, bruising or skin discoloration, shortness of breath, widespread rash, skin peeling and fever.
All of these reactions needs urgent medical attention.
Can I stop taking Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Abbprox CV 200mg/125mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

How long should I take AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT?
AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT effective?
AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT?
If you forget a dose of AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT safe for the kidneys?
Yes, AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
How long should I take AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT?
AB-Cef 100 Tablet DT is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Who should not use Abcov 150mg Injection?
Use of Abcov 150mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Abcov 150mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Abcov 150mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Abcov 150mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Abcov 150mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health condition like a kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Abcov 150mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Abcov 150mg Injection administered?
Abcov 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Abdaz Oral Suspension is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Abdaz Oral Suspension?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Abdaz Oral Suspension.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Abdaz Oral Suspension to my child?
Abdaz Oral Suspension can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Abdaz Oral Suspension?
Abdaz Oral Suspension should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

What is Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Drotaverine and Mefenamic acid.
This medication helps to relieve abdominal pain.
Drotaverine relieves muscle spasms associated with smooth muscles in the abdomen.
Mefenamic Acid works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (swelling).
Is it safe to use Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients with abdominal pain.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
Talk to your doctor if you have vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark coloured and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Avoid spicy, salty and acidic foods (like lemons).
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, do not take a higher than the recommended dose of Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Abdoklis MF 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Drotaverine and Mefenamic acid.
This medication helps to relieve abdominal pain.
Drotaverine relieves muscle spasms associated with smooth muscles in the abdomen.
Mefenamic Acid works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (swelling).
Is it safe to use Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients with abdominal pain.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
Talk to your doctor if you have vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark coloured and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Avoid spicy, salty and acidic foods (like lemons).
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, do not take a higher than the recommended dose of Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Abdowin 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Abeclo P Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Abeclo P Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Abeclo P Syrup be stored?
Abeclo P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Abeclo P Syrup?
Abeclo P Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Abeclo P Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Abeclo P Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Is ABEL 10MG TABLET better than telmisartan?
Both ABEL 10MG TABLET and telmisartan are blood pressure-lowering medicines.
ABEL 10MG TABLET is a relatively new medicine.
It has been found to be as effective as telmisartan in lowering blood pressure.
It can be safely used in patients as it has fewer side effects.
How should I take ABEL 10MG TABLET?
You should take ABEL 10MG TABLET exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is for oral use and is usually taken once a day.
You should take it with plenty of water, with or without food.
It is recommended that you take this medicine at the same time every day.
Can I stop ABEL 10MG TABLET on my own?
No, do not stop taking ABEL 10MG TABLET without speaking to your doctor, even if you are feeling well or your blood pressure is controlled.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your blood pressure which may increase your risk of stroke.
How long does ABEL 10MG TABLET take to start working?
ABEL 10MG TABLET may take about 2 weeks to show a visible reduction in blood pressure.
Full benefits of ABEL 10MG TABLET may take a little longer, about 4 weeks.
What are the symptoms of overdose of ABEL 10MG TABLET?
Taking more than the recommended dose of ABEL 10MG TABLET may decrease your blood pressure due to which you may feel dizzy or may even faint.
Consult your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical aid in a nearby hospital.
Which class does ABEL 10MG TABLET belong to?
ABEL 10MG TABLET belongs to a class of medicines called angiotensin II receptor antagonists (AIIRAs).
Angiotensin II is a substance which occurs naturally in the body.
It tightens the blood vessels, which in turn increases the blood pressure.
ABEL 10MG TABLET blocks this effect so that the blood vessels relax, which helps lower your blood pressure.
=

What is Abenta IV Injection 40mg used for?
Abenta IV Injection 40mg is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Abenta IV Injection 40mg prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with Abenta IV Injection 40mg?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Abenta IV Injection 40mg.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Abenta IV Injection 40mg.
How long does it take for Abenta IV Injection 40mg to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Abenta IV Injection 40mg to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Does Abenta IV Injection 40mg cause weight gain?
Although rare but long-term treatment with Abenta IV Injection 40mg may cause weight gain.
The reason could be the relief from reflux symptoms which could make you eat more.
Consult your doctor for any weight-related concern.
Can I take alcohol with Abenta IV Injection 40mg?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Abenta IV Injection 40mg.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Abenta IV Injection 40mg, but it can increase the acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Abenta IV Injection 40mg is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
You must refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet?
Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Abepride Plus 1mg/500mg Tablet can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

Abetazole-DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Esomeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Abetazole-DSR Capsule?
Yes, Abetazole-DSR Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhoea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What is the best time to take Abetazole-DSR Capsule?
It is best to take Abetazole-DSR Capsule before the first meal of the day or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule can increase the risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
This is a serious side effect but the chance that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule?
The use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abetazole-DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Abevia 100 Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Abevia 100 Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Abevia 100 Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Abevia 100 Capsule be taken?
Abevia 100 Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Abevia 100 Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Abevia 100 Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Abevia 100 Capsule be avoided?
Abevia 100 Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Abevia 100 Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Abevia 100 Capsule.
Is Abevia 100 Capsule the same as theophylline?
Abevia 100 Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Abevia 100 Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of A-Bex -Junior Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking A-Bex -Junior Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe A-Bex -Junior Syrup?
A-Bex -Junior Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of A-Bex -Junior Syrup?
It is not recommended to use A-Bex -Junior Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of A-Bex -Junior Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Abf Injection is a supplement of thiamine.
Thiamine is also known as Vitamin B1.
The medicine is used in the treatment of low levels of thiamine in the body.
It protects the body from conditions which are caused due to low levels of thiamine such as heart, brain and nerve disorders.
This vitamin is needed to process carbohydrates, fat and protein in the body.
Our body requires vitamin B1 to form the fuel the body runs on i.e., adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Abf Injection provides the necessary dose of vitamin B1 which is used by nerve cells in order to function normally.
Who all are more likely to have deficiency of Abf Injection?
The levels of vitamin B1 in our body decline with age, irrespective of medical condition.
Deficiency is most commonly found in alcoholics, people with malabsorption conditions, and those eating a very poor diet.
It is also common in children with congenital heart disease.
Individuals undergoing regular kidney dialysis may develop severe vitamin B1 deficiency, which can result in potentially fatal complications.
So, it is advisable that persons receiving dialysis should discuss the need for Abf Injection with their physician.
Abf Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Abf Injection.
Does Abf Injection cause weight gain?
No, Abf Injection does not cause weight gain.
Some studies suggest that excessive deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause weight loss along with some other problems such as emotional disturbances, weakness or pain in the hands and legs etc.
If you are facing weight-related issues, consult your doctor.
Is Abf Injection good for diabetics?
Yes, Abf Injection has been proven to be beneficial for diabetic patients.
Abf Injection has also shown positive effects on issues caused by poor blood sugar control.
However, it would be best to consult your doctor before using Abf Injection.
=

I have been prescribed AB Gaba 300mg Tablet for pain.
When will I start feeling better?
It varies from person to person.
Some people take about a week or two before noticing relief in pain.
Whereas, some people may see an improvement straight away.
It is recommended that you take AB Gaba 300mg Tablet only for nerve pain and as advised by your doctor.
I think I have gained weight since I started taking AB Gaba 300mg Tablet.
Can this be because of AB Gaba 300mg Tablet?
Yes, AB Gaba 300mg Tablet may cause weight gain because it increases your hunger.
Regular physical exercise and a balanced diet with low calorie food may help you maintain a stable weight.
Consult a dietitian if you have any further concerns to keep your weight stable.
For how long do I need to take AB Gaba 300mg Tablet?
Your doctor will decide the duration of the treatment based on your condition and your response to the treatment.
For instance, if you have been prescribed AB Gaba 300mg Tablet for epilepsy, you may have to take it for a long time, maybe years even if your seizures are controlled.
Whereas, if you are taking it for nerve pain and it has relieved your pain, you may have to take it for several months only.
What are the serious side effects that may occur while taking AB Gaba 300mg Tablet?
Taking AB Gaba 300mg Tablet may cause yellowing of the skin or eyes (warning signs of jaundice), trouble in breathing or talking and tightness in chest or throat (suggestive of serious allergic skin reactions).
It may provoke suicidal thoughts and cause unusual bruises or bleeding which may be due to blood disorder.
Other serious side effects may include muscle weakness and pain, fever which could lead to kidney failure, long-lasting stomach pain, nausea and vomiting (suggestive of pancreatitis and rash).
Is AB Gaba 300mg Tablet habit forming?
No, it will not be addictive if you take it as per your doctor’s recommendations.
However, physical dependence has been reported in people who had taken more than the recommended dose of AB Gaba 300mg Tablet or had used AB Gaba 300mg Tablet for illnesses it is not approved for.
=

Abhay Tag Injection is a combination vaccine that helps protect against three different infectious diseases - diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis.
Abhay Tag Injection is used for booster vaccination against these three diseases in children (aged 4 years and above) and in adults.
This vaccine is given to people who have already completed primary vaccination with the DPT vaccine.
Diphtheria (a serious throat infection that may block airways), pertussis (respiratory infection known as whooping cough), and tetanus (lockjaw, muscle spasms, and paralysis) are serious and life-threatening diseases, which can be easily prevented with the help of proper vaccination.
What is a booster dose or booster vaccine or booster shot?
A booster dose or booster vaccine or booster shot is an additional dose of a vaccine that may have to be administered periodically (usually once every few years) after completing the initial or primary vaccination against certain diseases.
This helps to ‘boost’ your immunity against such diseases so that you are adequately protected against them.
How does Abhay Tag Injection work?
Abhay Tag Injection works by causing the body to produce its own protection (antibodies) against three life-threatening diseases caused by bacterial infection, that is diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (whooping cough).
When should Abhay Tag Injection not be given?
Abhay Tag Injection should not be given if you have had an allergic reaction to Abhay Tag Injection or any of its ingredients.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include itchy skin rash, shortness of breath or swelling of the face or tongue.
Get emergency medical help if you notice any such signs.
Consult your doctor if you have a severe infection with a high temperature.
A minor infection such as a cold should not be a problem, but talk to your doctor about , greater than or equal to 40°C.
Abhay Tag Injection should be avoided if the person has experienced any inflammation of the brain or problems with the nervous system within 7 days after previous vaccination with a vaccine against pertussis (whooping cough) disease.
If you have experienced a temporary reduction in blood platelets (which increases risk of bleeding or bruising), or problems with the brain or nerves after previous vaccination with a vaccine against diphtheria and/or tetanus, this vaccine cannot be given.
Do not use this vaccine if the expiry date printed on the pack has passed or if the packaging is torn or shows signs of tampering.
If you are not sure whether Abhay Tag Injection should be given, talk to your doctor.
How is Abhay Tag Injection given?
Abhay Tag Injection is only given by a doctor or a trained healthcare professional into a muscle (intramuscularly), normally the upper arm muscle.
Do not administer this vaccine yourself.
Firm pressure should be applied to the injection site, without any rubbing, for at least two minutes.
Due caution should be exercised, especially in patients with bleeding problems or low platelet counts since they are at risk of bleeding, following an injection into a muscle.
In patients with bleeding problems, the dose may need to be given under the skin (subcutaneously).
Abhay Tag Injection is never given into a vein (intravenously).
=

How long does Abicef T Injection takes to work?
Usually, Abicef T Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Abicef T Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Abicold Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Caffeine, Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold.
These symptoms may include body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, and runny and stuffy nose.
Are there any foods which I have to avoid while taking Abicold Tablet?
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or food that contain caffeine.
Foods like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate should be avoided as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or have chest discomfort.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc.) while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abicold Tablet?
Store your medicines in a cool dry place and keep them in the original pack or container until it is time to take them.
Store them out of sight and reach of children.
Unused medicines should be disposed of in special ways to ensure that pets, children and other people cannot consume them.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Abicold Tablet?
Serious side effects with Abicold Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abicold Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
=

Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Methylcobalamin.
This medication is useful in the treatment of pain due to nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
This medication works by regenerating damaged nerves in the body and decreasing the pain sensation.
The nerves in the periphery of your body, such as the nerves in your toes and fingertip are called peripheral nerves and any damage to one or more of these nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.
These nerves carry messages to/from the brain and spinal cord from/to the rest of the body.
A damage caused to these nerves stops them from functioning properly and the messages traveling between your central and peripheral nervous system get disrupted.
Can I stop taking Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule when my pain is relieved?
No, take Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule for the full prescribed length of time.
Your symptoms may improve before the nerves are completely regenerated and healed.
Can the use of Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule cause sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule as it can lead to severe sleepiness , causing falls or accidents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Abifabin 300mg/500mcg Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Abiflox OD 400mg Tablet.
=

What is Abijem 20 Tablet used for?
Abijem 20 Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Abijem 20 Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Abijem 20 Tablet to work?
Abijem 20 Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Abijem 20 Tablet?
It is best to take Abijem 20 Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Abijem 20 Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Abijem 20 Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Abijem 20 Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Abijem 20 Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Abijem 20 Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Abijem 20 Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
The use of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Abimet G 2mg/500mg Tablet SR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of my child’s medicine by myself?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension be stored?
Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension?
Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.If your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any serious side effects of this medicine for my child?
Although Abinim P 50mg/125mg Suspension is well-tolerated by children, if you notice your child experiencing any intolerable episodes like persistent vomiting, body swelling, decreased urine frequency, or serious allergic reaction, rush to your doctor on an immediate basis.
=

For how long can Abiox 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Abiox 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Abiox 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Abiox 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Abiox 250mg Injection administered?
Abiox 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Abiox 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Abiox 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Abiox 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abiox 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Abiox 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Abiox 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Abiox 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Abiox 250mg Injection?
=

What is Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
The use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abipanta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

What should I avoid while taking Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any of such symptoms contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure then you can consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet for a long time?
Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet for?
You may have to take Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
What if Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet doesn’t make me feel any better?
High blood pressure does not usually have any symptoms, so you may not feel ill if there is any change in the blood pressure.
Therefore, this medicine may not make you feel “better”.
This does not mean that you can stop the medicine as they are working in the background to reduce your risk of serious illness.
Can Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet affect my fertility or sex life?
Abipress AM 80mg/5mg Tablet may very rarely lead to erectile dysfunction (inability to gain or maintain an erection).
Consult your doctor if you are worried or notice some changes.
However, untreated hypertension (high blood pressure) itself can lead to erectile dysfunction, therefore it is important that you take your medicine regularly and keep track of your blood pressure.
=

Can Abiracure Tablet cure prostate cancer?
Abiracure Tablet does not cure cancer but helps in prolonging and improving the life of the patient.
Moreover, when prostate cancer is treated with Abiracure Tablet then the frequency of fractures is relatively less.
Similarly, the increase in pain is less common with Abiracure Tablet.
Is Abiracure Tablet a chemotherapy drug?
Abiracure Tablet is a hormonal treatment not a chemotherapy drug.
It is used to treat prostate cancer in adult men that has spread to other parts of the body.
Abiracure Tablet stops your body from making testosterone.
This can slow down the growth of prostate cancer.
Why do I need to take prednisolone with Abiracure Tablet?
Your doctor will always prescribe prednisolone with Abiracure Tablet.
Taking these two medicines together lowers the risk of getting high blood pressure, fluid retention (having too much water in your body), or having reduced levels of potassium in your blood, which can occur due to Abiracure Tablet.
Abiracure Tablet can cause severe liver problems.
In very rare cases, Abiracure Tablet may even cause failure of the liver to function (called acute liver failure), which can even lead to death.
Tell your doctor if you experience yellowing of the skin or eyes, darkening of the urine, or severe nausea or vomiting, as these could be signs or symptoms of liver problems.
How frequently should the liver investigations be done?
Liver enzymes should be measured prior to starting the treatment, every two weeks for the first three months into the treatment, and monthly thereafter.
If you develop clinical symptoms or signs suggestive of liver toxicity, liver enzymes should be measured immediately.
If the liver enzyme levels are increased beyond certain levels, your doctor may temporarily discontinue the treatment with Abiracure Tablet.
Abiracure Tablet should be taken on an empty stomach with water 1 hour before eating or at least 2 hours after eating.
Taking it with food may cause increased and variable levels of Abiracure Tablet in your blood which can be harmful.
Remember not to crush or chew the tablet.
=

Abirom 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Abirom 250mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Abirom 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abirom 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Abirom 250mg Tablet be taken at night?
Abirom 250mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Abirom 250mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Abirom 250mg Tablet to work?
Abirom 250mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Abirom 250mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Abirom 250mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Abirom 250mg Tablet?
=

How to take Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR?
Take Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR should be taken after food to avoid stomach discomfort.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
Inform your doctor if you experience any problem due to the use of Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR?
Serious side effects with Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any side effects like upper respiratory tract infection, fever, headache, pharyngitis, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, influenza.
irritability, restlessness, bad or vivid dreams, sleepwalking, depression, suicidal thoughts, disorientation (confusion), and hallucinations.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abisave M 200mg/10mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

What should I avoid while taking ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET?
If you accidentally take too much of ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any of such symptoms contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke.
What happens if I forget to take ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure then you can consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET?
You should not stop taking ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET for a long time?
ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET for?
You may have to take ABITEL-AM 40MG/5MG TABLET for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Abiways 200 SR Tablet?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Abiways 200 SR Tablet need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Abiways 200 SR Tablet, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Abiways 200 SR Tablet be taken?
Abiways 200 SR Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Abiways 200 SR Tablet?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Abiways 200 SR Tablet.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Abiways 200 SR Tablet be avoided?
Abiways 200 SR Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Abiways 200 SR Tablet, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Abiways 200 SR Tablet.
Is Abiways 200 SR Tablet the same as theophylline?
Abiways 200 SR Tablet comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Abiways 200 SR Tablet works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What if I give too much of Abixim 50 Oral Suspension by mistake?
An extra dose of Abixim 50 Oral Suspension is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Abixim 50 Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Abixim 50 Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Abixim 50 Oral Suspension?
Abixim 50 Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Abixim 50 Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Abixim 50 Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Abixim 50 Oral Suspension on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Abixim 50 Oral Suspension impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Abixim 50 Oral Suspension may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Abixim 50 Oral Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Abixim 50 Oral Suspension lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
Yes, irregular treatment, repeated use,, and misuse of Abixim 50 Oral Suspension can lead to resistance.
Resistant bacteria are no longer killed by the antibiotics and may lead to reinfection.
How long should I take Abixim 50 Oral Suspension?
Abixim 50 Oral Suspension is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Abizith 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Abizith 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Abizith 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abizith 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Abizith 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Abizith 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Abizith 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Abizith 500mg Tablet to work?
Abizith 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Abizith 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Abizith 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Abizith 500mg Tablet?
=

Is Abl 400mg Oral Suspension an antibiotic?
Yes, Abl 400mg Oral Suspension is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is Abl 400mg Oral Suspension used for?
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which Abl 400mg Oral Suspension would not be effective.
How does Abl 400mg Oral Suspension work?
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take Abl 400mg Oral Suspension?
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does Abl 400mg Oral Suspension kill eggs of the worms?
No, Abl 400mg Oral Suspension does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
Is Abl 400mg Oral Suspension safe?
Abl 400mg Oral Suspension is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Abl 400mg Oral Suspension effective for treating pinworms?
Yes, Abl 400mg Oral Suspension an effective medicine which is used for the treatment of pinworms (Enterobius vermicularis).
It shows active action against the larval and the adult stages of the worms.
Consult your doctor before taking any medicines for worm infections.
=

How to take Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet?
Take Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet should be taken after food to avoid stomach discomfort.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
Inform your doctor if you experience any problem due to the use of Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet?
Serious side effects with Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any side effects like upper respiratory tract infection, fever, headache, pharyngitis, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, influenza.
irritability, restlessness, bad or vivid dreams, sleepwalking, depression, suicidal thoughts, disorientation (confusion), and hallucinations.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ablife M 200mg/10mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

Abllin-LC Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Abllin-LC Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Abllin-LC Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Abllin-LC Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Abllin-LC Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Abllin-LC Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abllin-LC Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Abllin-LC Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Abllin-LC Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Abllin-LC Tablet.
=

Who should not use Abmal 150mg Injection?
Use of Abmal 150mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Abmal 150mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Abmal 150mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Abmal 150mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Abmal 150mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Abmal 150mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Abmal 150mg Injection administered?
Abmal 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Abmont 200mg Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Abmont 200mg Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Abmont 200mg Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Abmont 200mg Tablet SR be taken?
Abmont 200mg Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Abmont 200mg Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Abmont 200mg Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Abmont 200mg Tablet SR be avoided?
Abmont 200mg Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Abmont 200mg Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Abmont 200mg Tablet SR.
Is Abmont 200mg Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Abmont 200mg Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Abmont 200mg Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Abnerve Injection is a combination of three medicines: Nicotinamide, Cynacobalamin, and Folic acid.
This medicine is used for treating or preventing vitamin deficiency.
Deficiency of vitamins may cause anemia and other nerve problems.
Vitamin deficiency anemia is a lack of healthy red blood cells caused when you have lower than normal amounts of certain vitamins.
Vitamins whose deficiency leads to vitamin deficiency anemia include folic acid, vitamin B-12, and vitamin C.
Vitamin deficiency anemia can also occur if your body has trouble absorbing or processing the vitamins.
=

What is Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet?
Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet is a combination of five medicines: Caffeine, Cetirizine, Nimesulide, Paracetamol and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold.
These symptoms include body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, runny and stuffy nose.
Can I breastfeed while taking Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet.
This medicine contains cetirizine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet cause damage to liver?
Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet contains Paracetamol and Nimesulide.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
Are there any foods which I should avoid while taking Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet?
Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet contains caffeine.
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or food that also contain caffeine.
Foods like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate should be avoided as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or may have chest discomfort.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc) while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet?
Serious side effects with Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and may need urgent medical attention.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abnim Cold & Flu Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet?
Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Chlorzoxazone.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
Chlorzoxazone is a muscle relaxant which works by acting on the central nervous system.
Diclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the chemical substance (prostaglandins) in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet?
Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, stomach pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised for a specific time duration by your doctor.
However, it can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Aboflam MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Will taking a higher than the recommended dosage of Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet?
The use of Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Does Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet expire?
Yes, Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet does expire.
Please check the expiry date written on the pack of this medicine.
Do not use Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet after the expiry date.
What is Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet?
Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet
Can I stop taking Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aboheal Forte 50mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
=

When should I take Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet?
The suitable timing of taking this medicine might differ depending upon your condition.
Your doctor might instruct you to take 2 to 3 doses per day and suggest to take the last dose at bedtime.
Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet should be taken with water milk and can be taken with food or after food.
When prescribed for dissolving gallstones, it is usually suggested to be taken once daily at night.
Ideally, it should be taken at a gap of 6 hours, for example at 8 am, 2 pm and 8 pm.
Is Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet safe?
Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet is usually considered to be a safe and effective medicine.
However, this medicine may have some common side effects, such as diarrhea.
If diarrhea occurs, your doctor may reduce the dose and if it persists, your treatment may be discontinued.
Additionally, using this medicine as a long-term therapy may also affect your liver enzyme levels.
To keep a check on this, your doctor will keep monitoring your liver enzyme levels regularly.
Despite these minor side effects, this medicine is supposed to be a good alternative to surgery in some patients with gallstones.
How does Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet help the liver?
Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet acts on the liver and gets concentrated in the bile secreted from the liver.
This, as a result, suppresses the synthesis and secretion of cholesterol by the liver, thereby decreasing the cholesterol levels in bile.
This medicine also acts by stopping the intestines from absorbing the bile salts and cholesterol.
So, the reduced cholesterol saturation in the bile from the liver leads to the gradual dissolving of cholesterol from gallstones, leading to a decrease in size and their eventual dissolution.
It also reduces elevated liver enzyme levels by increasing the bile flow through the liver, hence protecting the liver cells.
Does Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, there is a chance of weight gain with Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet, but it is not common.
The use of Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet can cause weight gain when prescribed in patients with liver disease associated with chronic stasis of bile in small bile ducts of the liver.
In such condition, bile cannot flow from the liver to the small intestine.
Again, the chance of weight gain varies from person to person depending upon the disease, so consult your doctor if you experience weight gain.
What should I avoid while taking Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet?
While taking Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet, avoid taking an antacid preparation without consulting your doctor, as they decrease the effectiveness of Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet.
You should also avoid medicines like cholestyramine or colestipol as they affect the effectiveness of Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet.
So, ask your doctor about the time gap that should be maintained between Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet and these medicines.
Also, avoid taking oral contraceptives, estrogenic hormones and blood cholesterol-lowering agents such as clofibrate as they may increase the chances of developing gallstones and act opposite to the Aboliv UD 300mg Tablet.
=

What is Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet?
Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Chlorzoxazone.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
Chlorzoxazone is a muscle relaxant which works by acting on the central nervous system.
Diclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the chemical substance (prostaglandins) in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet?
Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, stomach pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised for a specific time duration by your doctor.
However, it can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Abonac MR 250mg/50mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Abose 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Abose 250mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Abose 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abose 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Abose 250mg Tablet be taken at night?
Abose 250mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Abose 250mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Abose 250mg Tablet to work?
Abose 250mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Abose 250mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Abose 250mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Abose 250mg Tablet?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Abose 250mg Tablet should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Abose 250mg Tablet.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Abose 250mg Tablet increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Abose 250mg Tablet a strong antibiotic?
Abose 250mg Tablet is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Abose 250mg Tablet has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
=

Can Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet be used to treat viral infections?
No, Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet is only indicated to treat bacterial infections.
It does not treat viral infections such as common cold, flu.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet?
The use of Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any constituents of this medicine.
Inform your doctor about your medical history before taking this medicine to avoid any side effects.
Can the use of Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Antibiotics can kill good, or helpful bacteria in your stomach and can cause diarrhea.
If you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent diarrhea.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting a doctor.
Can I stop taking Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aboxtil-CV 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
The use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Abpent D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

What is AB-Pril 5mg Tablet? What is it used for?
AB-Pril 5mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
It relaxes and widens the blood vessels, making it easier for the blood to pass through the vessels.
As a result of this, the heart does not have to work more to push the blood.
Since the workload on the heart is reduced, it helps to lower the blood pressure and thus reduces the risk of heart attack and stroke.
It is also used for the treatment and prevention of congestive heart failure.
Does AB-Pril 5mg Tablet cause excessive urination? Can it cause kidney damage?
No, AB-Pril 5mg Tablet does not cause excessive urination (loss of water through urine).
The use of AB-Pril 5mg Tablet may not affect normally functioning kidneys.
However, damage to the kidneys may occur when AB-Pril 5mg Tablet is given with a diuretic (water pill, a medicine that increases the urine output).
In such a case, either the diuretic should be discontinued or its dose should be reduced.
If you have severe heart failure or your kidneys are already affected then there is a risk of kidney failure.
However, timely and appropriate treatment can reverse the damage caused to kidneys.
Can use of AB-Pril 5mg Tablet affect my liver?
In rare cases, AB-Pril 5mg Tablet may cause yellowing of skin and eyes, loss of appetite and an increase in liver enzymes.
It can also cause considerable damage to the liver and even death.
Therefore, if you experience any such symptoms, call your doctor immediately.
Is it safe to use AB-Pril 5mg Tablet along with hydrochlorthiazide?
You have to be careful when taking AB-Pril 5mg Tablet with hydrochlorothiazide, as it can further decrease your blood pressure.
You may also develop symptoms of kidney failure, such as a reduced amount of urine, swelling of your legs, ankles, and feet from retention of water.
While some may experience unexplained shortness of breath, excessive drowsiness or fatigue, persistent nausea, confusion, pain or pressure in your chest and seizures (fits).
These symptoms usually occur if there is substantial water or salt loss prior to starting AB-Pril 5mg Tablet.
Therefore, if you face any such issues contact your doctor who will either advise you to discontinue hydrochlorothiazide or give a lower dose.
The doctor may also advise you AB-Pril 5mg Tablet in very low doses when used in combination with hydrochlorothiazide.
I am taking ibuprofen for arthritis, is it safe to take AB-Pril 5mg Tablet along with it?
You should avoid taking ibuprofen and AB-Pril 5mg Tablet together since there is a risk of kidney damage.
Also, this combined usage may reduce the effectiveness of AB-Pril 5mg Tablet.
Consult your doctor for an alternative to ibuprofen.
=

Can I stop taking Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers (NSAIDS) or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Abraxia TH 60mg/4mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Which is the best time to take Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule?
Take the Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is best to take one capsule daily on an empty stomach.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule?
Use of Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
Can the use of Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Does the use of Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule lead to increased risk of fractures?
Several studies in adults suggest that treatment with Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule may be associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis-related fractures of the hip, wrist or spine.
The risk of fracture was increased in patients who received high dose.
High dose can mean multiple daily doses, and long-term therapy (a year or longer).
Can I drive while taking Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule?
No, taking Abrizol L 75mg/20mg Capsule may make you feel sleepy, dizzy or could affect your eyesight.
So do not drive or use machines until you know how this medicine affects you.
=

How to take Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Take Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet should be taken after food to avoid stomach discomfort.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
Inform your doctor if you experience any problem due to the use of Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Serious side effects with Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any side effects like upper respiratory tract infection, fever, headache, pharyngitis, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, influenza.
irritability, restlessness, bad or vivid dreams, sleepwalking, depression, suicidal thoughts, disorientation (confusion), and hallucinations.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abrofyl M 200 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

What would happen if I use a higher than the recommended dose of Abronate-F Cream for long periods?
Abronate-F Cream should be used only for the dose and duration as advised by the doctor.
This medicine contains clobetasol which when used in higher doses and for longer periods can get absorbed in the blood circulation and cause adrenal suppression and Cushing's syndrome.
It can cause weight gain, high blood pressure and rounding of the face.
Its application could cause a change in color of skin at the site of application.
Veins beneath the skin become visible due to thinning and weakening of the skin.
There could be an increased hair growth.
If you experience an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Abronate-F Cream?
Use of Abronate-F Cream is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
Avoid its use in case of any fungal infections (ringworm or athlete's foot), viral infections (herpes or chickenpox) or for treatment of acne or rosacea.
Consult your doctor before using it for any condition.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abronate-F Cream?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Abronate-F Cream when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop using Abronate-F Cream and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abrotus-GM Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take Abrotus-GM Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using Abrotus-GM Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abrotus-GM Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

What is Abroxyl 25mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Abroxyl 25mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
Abroxyl 25mg Tablet effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Abroxyl 25mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does Abroxyl 25mg Tablet work for allergies?
Abroxyl 25mg Tablet works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of Abroxyl 25mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Abroxyl 25mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

Does Absull 100 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Absull 100 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Absull 100 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Absull 100 Tablet do to the brain?
Absull 100 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Absull 100 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Absull 100 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Absull 100 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Absull 100 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Absull 100 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Absull 100 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Absull 100 Tablet?
You should not take Absull 100 Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Absull 100 Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Absull 100 Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abthabron Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take Abthabron Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using Abthabron Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Abthabron Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

My child has a cough with no mucus.
Can I give Abtuss AX Syrup?
No, Abtuss AX Syrup is advised for the treatment of wet cough.
It aims to expel the mucus from the airway tract, thereby relieving your child from throat irritation, congestion and rendering him a soothing effect.
Whereas, for a dry cough, cough suppressants are a better option.
So, it will be wise to ask your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
What if my child takes too much Abtuss AX Syrup?
An overdose or a prolonged intake of Abtuss AX Syrup may cause serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, and excess salivation.
Make sure to give this medicine to your child strictly as per the prescribed dose, time, and way.
You must also ensure not to stop the medication abruptly even if your child starts to feel better.
Sudden withdrawal of this medicine may worsen your child’s condition.
My child has a severe cough.
Can I give him two cough medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by your child’s doctor.
In case of confusion, always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medications to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines that have been formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before giving it to your child.
How should Abtuss AX Syrup be stored?
Abtuss AX Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

Can Abvent 100mg/600mg Tablet interfere with laboratory tests?
Yes, Abvent 100mg/600mg Tablet contains Acetylcysteine which may interfere with laboratory tests like urine ketone test and may cause false test results.
Inform your doctor if you are taking Abvent 100mg/600mg Tablet before taking any tests.
Will Abvent 100mg/600mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If symptoms are not getting relieved by the recommended doses, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Abvent 100mg/600mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR?
Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR is a combination of three medicines: Glimepiride, Metformin and Voglibose.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves the blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
Voglibose is an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor which lowers the postprandial (after meals) glucose levels in the body.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of Type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR?
The use of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), nausea, diarrhea, altered taste, flatulence, stomach pain, headache, skin rash and respiratory tract infection.
Are there any specific conditions in which Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR should not be taken?
The use of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also avoided in patients with moderate to severe kidney disease and in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, colonic ulcerations and underlying metabolic acidosis including diabetic ketoacidosis.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR?
No, it is not safe to take Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR along with alcohol.
It may lower your low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) and can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
Can the use of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always keep glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abvoge GM 1 Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Abyclav LB Tablet?
Abyclav LB Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Abyclav LB Tablet?
Abyclav LB Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Abyclav LB Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Abyclav LB Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Abyclav LB Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Why is Abzocid OX Oral Suspension prescribed?
Abzocid OX Oral Suspension is prescribed for the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
How should I take Abzocid OX Oral Suspension?
Take Abzocid OX Oral Suspension on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
Can I drink water after taking Abzocid OX Oral Suspension?
Avoid drinking anything immediately after taking Abzocid OX Oral Suspension as that can reduce the effectiveness of this medicine.
Can the use of Abzocid OX Oral Suspension cause constipation?
Yes, Abzocid OX Oral Suspension contains Sucralfate, which can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation if it persists for a long time.
Can I stop taking Abzocid OX Oral Suspension when my symptoms are relieved?
No, take Abzocid OX Oral Suspension for the full prescribed length of time even if you feel better.
Do not stop taking this medication without consulting your doctor.
=

What is Abzorb Syndet Bar used for?
Abzorb Syndet Bar is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal skin infections such as ringworm (fungal skin infection that causes a red scaly rash on different parts of the body), athlete’s foot (fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), fungal nappy rash and fungal sweat rash.
It is also used to relieve irritation of the vulva (external thrush) and irritation occurring at the end of the penis, which may be associated with thrush.
Abzorb Syndet Bar is effective against which fungi?
Abzorb Syndet Bar is effective against Trichophyton species which cause ringworm infection, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (fungal infection of the skin in the groin or buttocks).
It is also effective against yeast known as Candida which commonly causes vaginal thrush (infection caused by an overgrowth of yeast called Candida albicans).
I have started using Abzorb Syndet Bar.
By when can I expect to start seeing the improvements?
The symptoms of skin infection, such as itching or soreness, should improve within a few days of treatment.
However, the signs such as redness and scaling may take longer to disappear.
Do not stop applying this medicine before the duration advised by your doctor, even if you feel better.
What precautions are necessary while applying Abzorb Syndet Bar?
Always wash your hands thoroughly before and after applying Abzorb Syndet Bar.
If you are using the cream for an infected foot, wash and dry your feet thoroughly before applying the cream, especially between the toes, before applying the cream.
Abzorb Syndet Bar should be applied thinly and evenly and rubbed gently onto the affected areas two or three times daily.
For how long should I apply Abzorb Syndet Bar? Can I stop if the symptoms have completely disappeared?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection.
In general, the treatment is continued for 1 month for tinea infection and for at least 15 days for candida infection.
Do not stop the treatment on your own even if you feel better because the infection may come back as it takes some time to kill the fungus.
Is Abzorb Syndet Bar safe to use in children?
Abzorb Syndet Bar is safe for children only if taken as directed by the doctor.
It should be given to children in the correct dose only for the prescribed length of time.
Minor side effects may occur but usually, they are not bothersome.
However, if you develop a burning sensation, redness, and itching (which is severe in nature), stop the medicine and contact your doctor.
Are there any measures that should be taken to help a faster recovery?
Keep the affected skin areas clean and dry but avoid excessive rubbing.
You may have the urge to scratch because of itchiness but avoid scratching as it will damage the surface of the skin and cause the infection to spread further.
Do not share towels, bath mats, etc.
with other people as you could spread the infection to them.
Does Abzorb Syndet Bar affect contraception?
Abzorb Syndet Bar may reduce the effectiveness of rubber contraceptives, like diaphragms and condoms.
If you are using the cream on the vulva or penis, you should use alternative methods of contraception, for at least 5 days after using Abzorb Syndet Bar.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as AC-2 Dry Syrup?
AC-2 Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting AC-2 Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with AC-2 Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking AC-2 Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of AC-2 Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving AC-2 Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of AC-2 Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, AC-2 Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acag-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acag-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acag-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acag-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acag-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acag-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acag-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Does Acardase 25mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Acardase 25mg Tablet does not cause hypoglycemia by itself though it has a glucose-lowering effect.
However, a fall of blood sugar levels in the hypoglycemic range may occur when given along with other antidiabetic medicines or insulin.
If this occurs, consult your doctor who may modify your dose accordingly.
Why does Acardase 25mg Tablet cause flatulence?
Acardase 25mg Tablet blocks the digestion of carbohydrates which causes the accumulation of undigested carbohydrates in the colon.
Bacterial fermentation of the accumulated carbohydrates causes intestinal gas, leading to flatulence and abdominal pain.
Can Acardase 25mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, diarrhea is a common side effect of Acardase 25mg Tablet.
However, this does not affect everybody.
Any food containing carbohydrates, such as household sugar (cane sugar) can cause diarrhea and severe abdominal pain.
If diarrhea persists or becomes severe, then contact your doctor immediately.
When should Acardase 25mg Tablet be taken?
Acardase 25mg Tablet should be taken with your meals and should be swallowed whole with water or chewed with the first mouthful of food.
The initial dose of Acardase 25mg Tablet is generally twice daily.
The dose is then gradually increased to thrice daily.
=

Does Acarpro 25mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Acarpro 25mg Tablet does not cause hypoglycemia by itself though it has a glucose-lowering effect.
However, a fall of blood sugar levels in the hypoglycemic range may occur when given along with other antidiabetic medicines or insulin.
If this occurs, consult your doctor who may modify your dose accordingly.
Why does Acarpro 25mg Tablet cause flatulence?
Acarpro 25mg Tablet blocks the digestion of carbohydrates which causes the accumulation of undigested carbohydrates in the colon.
Bacterial fermentation of the accumulated carbohydrates causes intestinal gas, leading to flatulence and abdominal pain.
Can Acarpro 25mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, diarrhea is a common side effect of Acarpro 25mg Tablet.
However, this does not affect everybody.
Any food containing carbohydrates, such as household sugar (cane sugar) can cause diarrhea and severe abdominal pain.
If diarrhea persists or becomes severe, then contact your doctor immediately.
When should Acarpro 25mg Tablet be taken?
Acarpro 25mg Tablet should be taken with your meals and should be swallowed whole with water or chewed with the first mouthful of food.
The initial dose of Acarpro 25mg Tablet is generally twice daily.
The dose is then gradually increased to thrice daily.
What if I forget to take Acarpro 25mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose of Acarpro 25mg Tablet, do not take the missed dose between meals.
Wait for the scheduled dose and meal and continue taking your tablets as prescribed.
Do not take the dose twice to make up for your forgotten tablets.
What will happen if more than the recommended dose of Acarpro 25mg Tablet is taken?
If you take more than the recommended dose of Acarpro 25mg Tablet then it may cause temporary increase in flatulence (accumulation of gas), diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort.
It is advised to avoid meals or drinks containing carbohydrates for the next 4-6 hours.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acb 200mg Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acb 200mg Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acb 200mg Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acb 200mg Tablet SR be taken?
Acb 200mg Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acb 200mg Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acb 200mg Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acb 200mg Tablet SR be avoided?
Acb 200mg Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acb 200mg Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acb 200mg Tablet SR.
Is Acb 200mg Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Acb 200mg Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acb 200mg Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What is Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acbia P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

What should be avoided while taking AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR.
Can I stop AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to the use of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR, inform your doctor.
Can the use of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of AC-Breathe-Plus Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free?
AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free is a combination of three medicines: oxetacaine, aluminium hydroxide and milk of magnesia.
It is used in the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
Oxetacaine is a local anesthetic that provides relief from pain due to ulcers or acidic injury in the stomach.
Aluminium hydroxide and milk of magnesia are antacids which are used together to relieve heartburn, acidity and upset stomach.
They may be used to treat the symptoms in patients with peptic ulcer, gastritis, esophagitis or gastric hyperacidity (too much acidity in the stomach).
Is it safe to use AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free?
AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like constipation, diarrhea, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the use of AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free cause constipation?
Yes, the use of AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free Of Magnesia can cause constipation.
Eat a good amount of high-fiber foods such as fresh fruits, vegetables and cereals.
Drink plenty of water or other fluids and exercise regularly.
These lifestyle changes will help in relieving constipation.
Can the use of AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
What are the recommended storage conditions for AC-Caine Oral Gel Mint Sugar Free?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acceclopee Plus 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Accede SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Is Accept 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Accept 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Accept 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Accept 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Accept 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Accept 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Accept 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Accept 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Accept 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Accept 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Accept 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Accept 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Accept 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Accept 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Accept 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Accept 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Accewell-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Accewell-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Accewell-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Accewell-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Accitob 80mg Injection administered?
Accitob 80mg Injection should be administered into a vein (intravenously) under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Accitob 80mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Accitob 80mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Accitob 80mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Accitob 80mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Accitob 80mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Accitob 80mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Is it safe to use Accom-DSR Capsule?
Yes, Accom-DSR Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Accom-DSR Capsule?
The use of Accom-DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Accom-DSR Capsule?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Accom-DSR Capsule cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Accom-DSR Capsule can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Accom-DSR Capsule lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Accom-DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
=

Can Acctum-CL 625 Tablet be used to treat viral infections?
No, Acctum-CL 625 Tablet is only indicated to treat bacterial infections.
It does not treat viral infections such as common cold, flu.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Acctum-CL 625 Tablet?
The use of Acctum-CL 625 Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any constituents of this medicine.
Inform your doctor about your medical history before taking this medicine to avoid any side effects.
Can the use of Acctum-CL 625 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acctum-CL 625 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Antibiotics can kill good, or helpful bacteria in your stomach and can cause diarrhea.
If you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent diarrhea.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting a doctor.
Can I stop taking Acctum-CL 625 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acctum-CL 625 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acctum-CL 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet?
Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet?
The use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Accuglim M Forte 1mg/1000mg Tablet can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

What is Accunac DS 180mg/96mg/200mg Tablet used for?
This is a combination of three medicines: Bromelain, Trypsin and Rutoside.
Bromelain and Trypsin are enzymes which increase blood supply in the affected area and help the body produce substances that fight pain and swelling.
Rutoside is an antioxidant which protects the body from any damage caused by chemicals (free radicals) and further reduces swelling.
No, Trypsin is not a hormone.
It is an enzyme, a protein and an endopeptidase.
What is the recommended storage condition for Accunac DS 180mg/96mg/200mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How long does Accutaz AS 1000mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Accutaz AS 1000mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Accutaz AS 1000mg/125mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Can the use of Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Accuzon Plus 500 mg/250 mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

What is Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Yes, Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
The use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acdan T 100mg/8mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Is Acdol 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acdol 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acdol 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acdol 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acdol 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acdol 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acdol 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acdol 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acdol 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acdol 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acdol 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acdol 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acdol 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acdol 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acdol 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acdol 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acdol 200mg Tablet SR be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acdol 200mg Tablet SR during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acdol 200mg Tablet SR can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acdol 200mg Tablet SR during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acdol 200mg Tablet SR may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Is Aceact 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Aceact 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aceact 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Aceact 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aceact 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Aceact 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aceact 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aceact 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aceact 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aceact 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Aceact 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aceact 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Aceact 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aceact 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Aceact 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aceact 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceba SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

What is Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acebid Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acebitor 5mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Acebitor 5mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
It is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).
It relaxes and widens the blood vessels, making it easier for the blood to pass through the vessels.
As a result of this, the heart does not have to work more to push the blood.
Since the workload on the heart is reduced, it helps to lower the blood pressure and thus reduces the risk of heart attack and stroke.
What should I tell my doctor before taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet?
Before taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet you must tell your doctor if you are allergic to Acebitor 5mg Tablet or any of its ingredients.
You must tell the doctor if you have any problems related to heart, liver, kidneys (if you are on dialysis) or blood, such as a low white blood cell count (neutropenia or agranulocytosis).
Inform your doctor if you have diabetes, irregular blood pressure or if you have recently had diarrhea or vomiting.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Consult your doctor before taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet if you are planning to conceive, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
What time of the day should I take Acebitor 5mg Tablet?
Acebitor 5mg Tablet should be taken at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
Take it in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor.
Your doctor may advise you to take your first dose before bedtime, because it can make you dizzy.
After the first dose, if you do not feel dizzy, you may take Acebitor 5mg Tablet at any time of the day.
Your dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and therefore, it will vary from person to person.
If you experience any side effects while taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet, please consult your doctor.
I feel better after taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet, can I stop taking it?
No, continue taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet even if you feel better and your blood pressure is under control.
Stopping Acebitor 5mg Tablet suddenly may cause your blood pressure to increase and your chances of stroke or heart attack may rise.
Usually once you start taking any medicine for controlling blood pressure, you have to continue taking it life long unless you cannot tolerate it.
Will Acebitor 5mg Tablet make me feel dizzy? What should I do about it?
Yes, Acebitor 5mg Tablet may make you feel dizzy or lightheaded.
If Acebitor 5mg Tablet makes you feel dizzy when you stand up, try getting up very slowly or stay seated until you feel better.
If you begin to feel dizzy, lie down so that you don't faint, then sit until you feel better.
Don’t drive, do not use tools or machines and avoid anything requiring concentration while you're feeling dizzy or shaky.
What other lifestyle changes should I make while taking Acebitor 5mg Tablet?
=

Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acebook 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acebrel 200 Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acebrel 200 Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acebrel 200 Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acebrel 200 Tablet SR be taken?
Acebrel 200 Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acebrel 200 Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acebrel 200 Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acebrel 200 Tablet SR be avoided?
Acebrel 200 Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acebrel 200 Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acebrel 200 Tablet SR.
Is Acebrel 200 Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Acebrel 200 Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acebrel 200 Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acebrobid Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acebrobid Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acebrobid Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acebrobid Capsule be taken?
Acebrobid Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acebrobid Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acebrobid Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acebrobid Capsule be avoided?
Acebrobid Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acebrobid Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acebrobid Capsule.
Is Acebrobid Capsule the same as theophylline?
Acebrobid Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acebrobid Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR be taken?
Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR be avoided?
Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR.
Is Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acebrogen 200mg Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acebronic 100mg Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acebronic 100mg Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acebronic 100mg Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acebronic 100mg Capsule be taken?
Acebronic 100mg Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acebronic 100mg Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acebronic 100mg Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acebronic 100mg Capsule be avoided?
Acebronic 100mg Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acebronic 100mg Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acebronic 100mg Capsule.
Is Acebronic 100mg Capsule the same as theophylline?
Acebronic 100mg Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acebronic 100mg Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acebrovel 100mg Tablet?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acebrovel 100mg Tablet need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acebrovel 100mg Tablet, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acebrovel 100mg Tablet be taken?
Acebrovel 100mg Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acebrovel 100mg Tablet?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acebrovel 100mg Tablet.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acebrovel 100mg Tablet be avoided?
Acebrovel 100mg Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acebrovel 100mg Tablet, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acebrovel 100mg Tablet.
Is Acebrovel 100mg Tablet the same as theophylline?
Acebrovel 100mg Tablet comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acebrovel 100mg Tablet works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Acebust-Plus Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acebust-Plus Tablet?
Acebust-Plus Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acebust-Plus Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acebust-Plus Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acebust-Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acebust-Plus Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acebust-Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acebust-Plus Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acebust-Plus Tablet?
The use of Acebust-Plus Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acebust-Plus Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acebust-Plus Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acebust-Plus Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acecare SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acecare SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acecare SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acecare SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acecare SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Aceclance-P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Aceclance-P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Aceclance-P Oral Suspension be stored?
Aceclance-P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Aceclance-P Oral Suspension?
Aceclance-P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Aceclance-P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Aceclance-P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aceclave DS Syrup?
Aceclave DS Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aceclave DS Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aceclave DS Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Aceclave DS Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Aceclave DS Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Aceclave DS Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is Acecloace 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acecloace 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acecloace 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acecloace 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acecloace 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acecloace 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acecloace 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acecloace 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acecloace 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acecloace 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acecloace 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acecloace 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acecloace 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acecloace 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acecloace 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acecloace 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acecloace 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acecloace 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acecloace 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acecloace 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
Acecloace 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acecloace 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

What is Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aceclocare P 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclodus P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
=

What is Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceclofisch SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Aceclogip-Plus Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclogip-Plus Tablet?
Aceclogip-Plus Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclogip-Plus Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclogip-Plus Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet?
The use of Aceclogip-Plus Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aceclokas P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Is Aceclomax 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Aceclomax 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Aceclomax 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aceclomax 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Aceclomax 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aceclomax 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aceclomax 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aceclomax 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aceclomax 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aceclomax 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aceclomax 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Aceclomax 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aceclomax 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Aceclomax 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aceclomax 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Aceclomax 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Aceclomax 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Aceclomax 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Aceclomax 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Aceclomax 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR when my pain is relieved?
Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR can cause nausea and vomiting.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can I take Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
What is the recommended storage condition for Aceclomay-RB Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclonac P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
=

What is Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclopat Forte 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Aceclopride-T8 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclopride-T8 Tablet?
Yes, Aceclopride-T8 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aceclopride-T8 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aceclopride-T8 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aceclopride-T8 Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet?
The use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclopride-T8 Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclopride-T8 Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclopride-T8 Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceclopride-T8 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclorex 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can the use of Aceclo Spas Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aceclo Spas Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of Aceclo Spas Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Aceclo Spas Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Aceclo Spas Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aceclo Spas Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of Aceclo Spas Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking Aceclo Spas Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceclo Spas Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aceclo Spas Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acecloud SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acecloud SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acecloud SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acecloud SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acecloud SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acecloud SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Aceclowal P 100mg/500mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acecloworth P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acecloworth P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acecloworth P Oral Suspension be stored?
Acecloworth P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acecloworth P Oral Suspension?
Acecloworth P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acecloworth P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acecloworth P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Is Aceco 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Aceco 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aceco 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Aceco 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aceco 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Aceco 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aceco 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aceco 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aceco 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aceco 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Aceco 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aceco 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Aceco 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aceco 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Aceco 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aceco 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Aceco 200mg Tablet SR be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Aceco 200mg Tablet SR during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Aceco 200mg Tablet SR can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Aceco 200mg Tablet SR during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Aceco 200mg Tablet SR may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acecon MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acecott P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the levels of those chemical substances in the body which cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your doctor.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acec R 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acedac-P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acedase AP Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acedase AP Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acedase AP Oral Suspension be stored?
Acedase AP Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acedase AP Oral Suspension?
Acedase AP Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acedase AP Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acedase AP Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Can the use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acedaz TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

Aceden-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceden-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceden-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceden-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceden-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceden-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceden-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceden-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceden-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceden-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceden-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Aceden-MR Tablet take to act?
=

What is Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acedex SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will Acedol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher than recommended doses?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Paracetamol/Acetaminophen.
It also increases the movement of the stomach and intestines, allowing food to move more easily through the stomach.
This prevents nausea and vomiting caused due to migraine.
Paracetamol/Acetaminophen is an analgesic (pain reliever) and an anti-pyretic (fever reducer) which blocks the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and fever associated with migraine.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects and liver damage.
If you are experiencing increased severity of symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I get addicted to Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet.
Can the use of Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Yes, Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet can cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Acedome 10mg/500mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acedoz 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will Aceed MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher than recommended doses?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How long does Ace Eye Drop takes to work?
Usually, Ace Eye Drop starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop using Ace Eye Drop when I feel better?
No, do not stop using Ace Eye Drop and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acefac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acefem SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Acefe-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acefe-P Tablet?
Acefe-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acefe-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acefe-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acefe-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acefe-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acefe-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acefe-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acefe-P Tablet?
The use of Acefe-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Acefile 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acefile 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acefile 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acefile 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acefile 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acefile 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acefile 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acefile 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acefile 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acefile 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acefile 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acefile 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acefile 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acefile 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acefile 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acefile 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acefile 200mg Tablet SR be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acefile 200mg Tablet SR during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acefile 200mg Tablet SR can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acefile 200mg Tablet SR during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acefile 200mg Tablet SR may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Yes, Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet?
The use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acefinity 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

What is Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceflagin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Aceflam P Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Aceflam P Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Aceflam P Syrup be stored?
Aceflam P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Aceflam P Syrup?
Aceflam P Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Aceflam P Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Aceflam P Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceflex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
=

Can the use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceflip TH Forte 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

Is Acefo 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Acefo 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Acefo 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acefo 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Acefo 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Acefo 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Acefo 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Acefo 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Acefo 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Acefo 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acefo 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Acefo 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Acefo 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Acefo 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Acefo 200mg Tablet treat UTI?
=

What is Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceford P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Is Acefox CX 1000mg Injection safe?
Acefox CX 1000mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Acefox CX 1000mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Acefox CX 1000mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Acefox CX 1000mg Injection?
Acefox CX 1000mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Acefox CX 1000mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Acefox CX 1000mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Acefox CX 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Acefox CX 1000mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Acefox CX 1000mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Is Acefox CX 1000mg Injection effective?
Acefox CX 1000mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acefox CX 1000mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

What is Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acef TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet?
Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Methylcobalamin.
This medication is useful in the treatment of pain due to nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
This medication works by regenerating damaged nerves in the body and decreasing the pain sensation.
The nerves in the periphery of your body, such as the nerves in your toes and fingertip are called peripheral nerves and any damage to one or more of these nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.
These nerves carry messages to/from the brain and spinal cord from/to the rest of the body.
A damage caused to these nerves stops them from functioning properly and the messages traveling between your central and peripheral nervous system get disrupted.
Can I stop taking Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, take Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet for the full prescribed length of time.
Your symptoms may improve before the nerves are completely regenerated and healed.
Can the use of Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet as it can lead to severe sleepiness , causing falls or accidents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Acegaba ME 100mg/500mcg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceglow SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acegril P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What should be avoided while taking Acegrow 3D Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Acegrow 3D Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Acegrow 3D Tablet.
Can I stop Acegrow 3D Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Acegrow 3D Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to the use of Acegrow 3D Tablet, inform your doctor.
Can the use of Acegrow 3D Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acegrow 3D Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acegrow 3D Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acegrow 3D Tablet will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acegrow 3D Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acehike P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can the use of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acehope Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acejas TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Is Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule a good painkiller?
Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule get you high?
No, Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule?
If you forget a dose of Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule make you drowsy?
Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule?
It is important to know that Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acekaitiz 100mg Capsule may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Aceked-P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Aceked-P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Aceked-P Oral Suspension be stored?
Aceked-P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Aceked-P Oral Suspension?
Aceked-P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Aceked-P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Aceked-P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceker SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acekul TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Acelab-TH Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelab-TH Tablet?
Yes, Acelab-TH Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acelab-TH Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acelab-TH Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acelab-TH Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acelab-TH Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelab-TH Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelab-TH Tablet?
The use of Acelab-TH Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acelear SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acelet SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acelet SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acelet SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acelet SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acelet SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acelet SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acelet SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acelet SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Acelic-TH8 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelic-TH8 Tablet?
Yes, Acelic-TH8 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acelic-TH8 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acelic-TH8 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acelic-TH8 Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet?
The use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acelic-TH8 Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acelic-TH8 Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acelic-TH8 Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acelic-TH8 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Aceline 200mg Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Aceline 200mg Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Aceline 200mg Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Aceline 200mg Tablet SR be taken?
Aceline 200mg Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Aceline 200mg Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Aceline 200mg Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Aceline 200mg Tablet SR be avoided?
Aceline 200mg Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Aceline 200mg Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Aceline 200mg Tablet SR.
Is Aceline 200mg Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Aceline 200mg Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Aceline 200mg Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What is Acelive MF 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Acelive MF 500mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Tranexamic Acid and Mefenamic Acid.
This medication is used to treat pain and is used to treat heavy bleeding during menstrual cycle (monthly periods) in women.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelive MF 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, it is considered to be harmful for patients with severe kidney failure, active intravascular clotting (obstruction in the blood flow due to blood clots), and color vision disorders.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acelive MF 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Aceliv-TH Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceliv-TH Tablet?
Yes, Aceliv-TH Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aceliv-TH Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aceliv-TH Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aceliv-TH Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aceliv-TH Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceliv-TH Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceliv-TH Tablet?
The use of Aceliv-TH Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceliv-TH Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceliv-TH Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceliv-TH Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceliv-TH Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceliv-TH Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Aceloemm-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceloemm-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceloemm-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceloemm-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceloemm-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceloemm-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceloemm-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceloemm-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceloemm-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceloemm-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceloemm-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acelofeb SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acelogic Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acelomag T 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acelom-TH Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelom-TH Tablet?
Yes, Acelom-TH Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acelom-TH Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acelom-TH Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acelom-TH Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acelom-TH Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelom-TH Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelom-TH Tablet?
The use of Acelom-TH Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acelopara Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acelopara Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acelopara Oral Suspension be stored?
Acelopara Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acelopara Oral Suspension?
Acelopara Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acelopara Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acelopara Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acelovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Can the use of Acelro-T4 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acelro-T4 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acelro-T4 Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acelro-T4 Tablet?
The use of Acelro-T4 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acelro-T4 Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acelro-T4 Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acelro-T4 Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acelro-T4 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acelro-T4 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acelro-T4 Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acelro-T4 Tablet cause damage to liver?
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acelro-T4 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acelza-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acelza-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acelza-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acelza-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acelza-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acelza-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acelza-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

What is Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Acemak P 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acemarc Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
=

Acemax P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemax P Tablet?
Acemax P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acemax P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acemax P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acemax P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acemax P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acemax P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemax P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acemax P Tablet?
The use of Acemax P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acemax P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acemax P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acemax P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Acemed MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acemed MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acemed MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acemed MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acemed MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acemed MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acemed MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acemed MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemed MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acemed MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acemed MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acemed MR Tablet take to act?
=

What is Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acemexa T 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acemiz -MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acemiz -MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acemiz -MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acemiz -MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acemiz -MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acemiz -MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acemiz -MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acemiz -MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemiz -MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acemiz -MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acemiz -MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acemiz -MR Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Acemiz -MR Tablet.
What if I forget to take Acemiz -MR Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acemiz -MR Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemo 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

What should be avoided while taking Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR.
Can I stop Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to the use of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR, inform your doctor.
Can the use of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acemont FX 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acemove-P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Acemug 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Acemug 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Acemug 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acemug 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Acemug 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Acemug 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Acemug 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Acemug 500mg Tablet to work?
Acemug 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Acemug 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Acemug 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Acemug 500mg Tablet?
=

Acenac-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acenac-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acenac-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acenac-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acenac-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acenac-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acenac-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acenac-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acenac-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acenac-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acenac-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

Is Acenal 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acenal 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acenal 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acenal 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acenal 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acenal 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acenal 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acenal 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acenal 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acenal 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acenal 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acenal 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acenal 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acenal 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acenal 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acenal 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acenal 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acenal 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acenal 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acenal 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
Acenal 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acenal 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Is Acenate 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acenate 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acenate 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acenate 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acenate 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acenate 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acenate 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acenate 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acenate 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acenate 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acenate 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acenate 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acenate 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acenate 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acenate 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acenate 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acenec 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acenet SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acenift P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acenin SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acennial SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Acenol 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acenol 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acenol 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acenol 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acenol 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acenol 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acenol 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acenol 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acenol 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acenol 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acenol 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acenol 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acenol 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acenol 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acenol 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acenol 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

Is Acenova 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acenova 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acenova 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acenova 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acenova 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acenova 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acenova 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acenova 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acenova 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acenova 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acenova 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acenova 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acenova 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acenova 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acenova 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acenova 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acenova 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acenova 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acenova 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acenova 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acenox P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acenox P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acenox P Oral Suspension be stored?
Acenox P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acenox P Oral Suspension?
Acenox P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acenox P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acenox P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Acentio P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acentio P Tablet?
Acentio P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acentio P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acentio P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acentio P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acentio P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acentio P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acentio P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acentio P Tablet?
The use of Acentio P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acentio P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acentio P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acentio P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acenus P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Aceoj-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceoj-P Tablet?
Aceoj-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceoj-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceoj-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceoj-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceoj-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceoj-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceoj-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceoj-P Tablet?
The use of Aceoj-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceone SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceone SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceone SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceone SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceone SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceone SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceone SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Aceone SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Is Acep 200mg Tablet DT safe to use?
Acep 200mg Tablet DT is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Acep 200mg Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acep 200mg Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
Acep 200mg Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Acep 200mg Tablet DT an antibiotic?
Yes, Acep 200mg Tablet DT is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Acep 200mg Tablet DT cause constipation?
Yes, Acep 200mg Tablet DT may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Acep 200mg Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acep 200mg Tablet DT before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Acep 200mg Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Acep 200mg Tablet DT starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Acep 200mg Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Acep 200mg Tablet DT treat UTI?
Yes, Acep 200mg Tablet DT may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Acep 200mg Tablet DT.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acepain SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acepain SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acepain SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acepain SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acepain SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acepain SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acepanac-P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acepanac-P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acepanac-P Oral Suspension be stored?
Acepanac-P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acepanac-P Oral Suspension?
Acepanac-P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acepanac-P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acepanac-P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Is Acepar 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acepar 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acepar 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acepar 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acepar 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acepar 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acepar 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acepar 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acepar 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acepar 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acepar 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acepar 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acepar 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acepar 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acepar 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acepar 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acepark P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceparz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acepep SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acepep SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acepep SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acepep SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acepep SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acepep SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acepep SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acepep SP Tablet than recommended?
=

What is Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acephar SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acephyl SR 200 Tablet?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acephyl SR 200 Tablet need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acephyl SR 200 Tablet, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acephyl SR 200 Tablet be taken?
Acephyl SR 200 Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acephyl SR 200 Tablet?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acephyl SR 200 Tablet.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acephyl SR 200 Tablet be avoided?
Acephyl SR 200 Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acephyl SR 200 Tablet, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acephyl SR 200 Tablet.
Is Acephyl SR 200 Tablet the same as theophylline?
Acephyl SR 200 Tablet comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acephyl SR 200 Tablet works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What is Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acepil SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage due to long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can the use of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
This medicine is known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
How long will Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to see the initial benefit of pain relief after taking Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acepira TP 100mg/325mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

Is Aceplee-SR Tablet a good painkiller?
Aceplee-SR Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Aceplee-SR Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aceplee-SR Tablet get you high?
No, Aceplee-SR Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aceplee-SR Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aceplee-SR Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aceplee-SR Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aceplee-SR Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aceplee-SR Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aceplee-SR Tablet make you drowsy?
Aceplee-SR Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Is Acepod 100mg Tablet safe to use?
Acepod 100mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Acepod 100mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acepod 100mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Acepod 100mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Acepod 100mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Acepod 100mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Acepod 100mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Acepod 100mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Acepod 100mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acepod 100mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
=

Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Acepra 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Aceprime-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceprime-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceprime-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceprime-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceprime-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceprime-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceprime-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceprime-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceprime-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceprime-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceprime-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup be stored?
Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup?
Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Aceprone 50mg/125mg Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Ace Proxyvon Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Ace Proxyvon Tablet?
Ace Proxyvon Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Ace Proxyvon Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Ace Proxyvon Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet?
The use of Ace Proxyvon Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Ace Proxyvon Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Ace Proxyvon Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Ace Proxyvon Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acequin MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

Ace-Rabinom Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the levels of those chemical substances in the body which cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Ace-Rabinom Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Ace-Rabinom Tablet, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your doctor.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Ace-Rabinom Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Ace-Rabinom Tablet can increase the risks of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Ace-Rabinom Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Aceraj-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceraj-P Tablet?
Aceraj-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceraj-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceraj-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceraj-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceraj-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceraj-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceraj-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceraj-P Tablet?
The use of Aceraj-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acerav P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension be stored?
Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension?
Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acerest-Plus Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acerich P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acerit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Is Acerock 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acerock 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acerock 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acerock 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acerock 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acerock 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acerock 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acerock 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acerock 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acerock 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acerock 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acerock 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acerock 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acerock 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acerock 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acerock 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet?
Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet?
Yes, Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet?
The use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aceron MR 100 mg/4 mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceros MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceroz-SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acerut SP 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aceseiv-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aceseiv-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aceseiv-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acesic-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acesic-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acesic-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acesic-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acesic-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acesic-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acesic-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acesoft-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acesoft-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acesoft-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acesoft-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acesoft-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aces SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Does Acet 10mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Acet 10mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Acet 10mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Acet 10mg Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Acet 10mg Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Acet 10mg Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Acet 10mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Acet 10mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Acet 10mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Acet 10mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Acet 10mg Tablet.
Is it safe to take Acet 10mg Tablet daily for a long time?
Acet 10mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Acet 10mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

What is Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acetac S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acetal P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Acetamol-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acetamol-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acetamol-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acetamol-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acetamol-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acetamol-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acetamol-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acetamol-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetamol-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acetamol-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acetamol-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acetan TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acetate T 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Is Acetel 600mg Tablet safe for pregnant women?
Acetel 600mg Tablet can be given to a pregnant woman if the benefit of this medicine is more than the risk involved.
Evidence shows it can be used in pregnant females without any gross risk to the fetus in the womb.
Consult your doctor before starting the medication.
How long can you take Acetel 600mg Tablet for?
The duration of treatment with Acetel 600mg Tablet will be decided by the doctor.
It will depend on the type of disease for which it has been prescribed.
For respiratory conditions, it can be taken for 5 days and can be further extended to 2 weeks depending upon the condition of the patient.
Can Acetel 600mg Tablet be given to children below 2 years of age?
Medicines like Acetel 600mg Tablet are not recommended to be used in children under 2 years of age.
This is because the medicine works by dissolving the mucus which can cause a block in the breathing airway, and children below 2 years of age may not be able to clear it or cough it out properly.
Still, in certain conditions it can be prescribed by your doctor, hence, follow the instructions as provided.
Consult the doctor for any query.
Can I take cough syrups while taking Acetel 600mg Tablet?
No, you should not start taking cough syrups without consulting your doctor.
The cough syrups which suppress the cough should be avoided with this medication as it would interfere with the action of the medicine.
=

How to take Acethama-M Tablet SR?
Take Acethama-M Tablet SR exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Acethama-M Tablet SR should be taken after food to avoid stomach discomfort.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acethama-M Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acethama-M Tablet SR will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop Acethama-M Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Acethama-M Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
Inform your doctor if you experience any problem due to the use of Acethama-M Tablet SR.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Acethama-M Tablet SR?
Serious side effects with Acethama-M Tablet SR are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any side effects like upper respiratory tract infection, fever, headache, pharyngitis, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, influenza.
irritability, restlessness, bad or vivid dreams, sleepwalking, depression, suicidal thoughts, disorientation (confusion), and hallucinations.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acethama-M Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

What are acetic acid ear drops used for?
Acetik Ear Drop contains acetic acid which is effective in treating infections caused by bacteria or fungus in the ear canal.
This medicine will not treat an inner ear infection.
What should you inform your doctor before using Acetik Ear Drop?
Before using this medicine, inform your doctor if you have a hole in your ear drum (ruptured ear drum).
What should I watch for while using this medicine?
Inform your doctor if pain occurs during use, or if symptoms worsen or do not improve within 48 hours, or if your hearing becomes impaired.
For how long shall I use Acetik Ear Drop?
It is advisable not to use this medicine for more than 7 days or use it as prescribed by your doctor.
Can Acetik Ear Drop be used in children?
No, this medicine is not recommended for children under 12 years of age without medical advice.
What are the precautions for ear infections?
It is important that you keep the infected ear(s) clean and dry.
When bathing, try not to get the infected ear(s) wet.
Apart from this, do not share ear products or towels, and washcloths with anyone else in order to prevent the spread of infection.
=

Acetis MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acetis MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acetis MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acetis MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acetis MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acetis MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acetis MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acetis MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetis MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acetis MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acetis MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acetis MR Tablet take to act?
=

How much Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup?
Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
My child vomited after taking Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup.
If your child vomits within 30 minutes of taking Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup, repeat the dose again.
If it has been more than 30 minutes after taking Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup and your child vomits, no need to repeat the dose and wait until it is time for the next dose.
If you are not sure, consult your doctor.
Can I give Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup is considered as overdose?
You should only take four doses of Aceto 125mg/5ml Syrup in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
=

How much Acetomef Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure safe and complete recovery of your child.
Can I change the dose of Acetomef Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While an unnecessary increase in dose may lead to toxicity, a sudden lowering of the dosing may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acetomef Oral Suspension?
Acetomef Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose based on the child’s age and body weight.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
The doctor may advise you to keep giving Acetomef Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the illness.
You’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better gradually as the course approaches its end.
In case your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any serious side effects of this medicine for my child?
Acetomef Oral Suspension is well-tolerated by most children.
However, if your child experiences any intolerable episodes like persistent vomiting, body swelling, decreased urine frequency, serious allergic reaction, and severe pain due to gastric ulcers, then rush to your doctor on an immediate basis.
How should I store Acetomef Oral Suspension?
Store Acetomef Oral Suspension at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Avoid leaving medicines within the reach and sight of children.
=

Aceton-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aceton-P Tablet?
Aceton-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aceton-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aceton-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aceton-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceton-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aceton-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceton-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceton-P Tablet?
The use of Aceton-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aceton-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceton-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceton-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aceton-P Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aceton-P Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aceton-P Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aceton-P Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Aceton-P Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Aceton-P Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aceton-P Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
How long does it take for Aceton-P Tablet to show results?
The effect of Aceton-P Tablet can be seen within 1.5 to 3 hours of oral administration of the medicine and the time taken to show the desired effects may vary with every individual patient.
What is the dosage of Aceton-P Tablet?
You may take one tablet of Aceton-P Tablet twice daily or as prescribed by your doctor.
Always follow your doctor’s instructions while taking this medicine.
=

What is Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Nimesulide and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving the pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Can I stop taking Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is usually used for short-term pain relief and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should also be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with the history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex helps to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Does Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet help in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Aceto Plus 100 mg/500 mg Tablet contains Nimesulide and Paracetamol and both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
=

What is Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acet PC 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR?
Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR when my pain is relieved?
Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR can cause nausea and vomiting.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can I take Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acetrial R 200mg/20mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acetrol-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acetrol-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acetrol-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acetrol-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acetrol-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acetrol-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acetrol-SP Tablet than recommended?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acetrol-SP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acetuff P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acetuff P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acetuff P Oral Suspension be stored?
Acetuff P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acetuff P Oral Suspension?
Acetuff P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acetuff P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acetuff P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Acetus-CZ Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acetus-CZ Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acetus-CZ Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acetus-CZ Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acetus-CZ Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acetus-CZ Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acetus-CZ Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acetus-CZ Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acetus-CZ Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acetus-CZ Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acetus-CZ Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage due to long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can the use of Acevak XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
=

Can the use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acevat P 8mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Acevel 200mg Tablet SR?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Acevel 200mg Tablet SR need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Acevel 200mg Tablet SR, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Acevel 200mg Tablet SR be taken?
Acevel 200mg Tablet SR should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Acevel 200mg Tablet SR?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Acevel 200mg Tablet SR.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Acevel 200mg Tablet SR be avoided?
Acevel 200mg Tablet SR should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Acevel 200mg Tablet SR, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Acevel 200mg Tablet SR.
Is Acevel 200mg Tablet SR the same as theophylline?
Acevel 200mg Tablet SR comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Acevel 200mg Tablet SR works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Can the use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet lead to hypoglycemia?
The use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet does not usually cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) alone.
But it could occur if there is insufficient supplementation of calories while taking this medicine.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
The symptoms are more likely to be noticed if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise, or take any other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar levels is important.
It is recommended to always carry glucose tablets, honey, or fruit juice with you.
Can the use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark-colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet?
The use of Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergies to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also considered to be harmful to patients with severe kidney impairment, liver impairment, congestive heart failure, lactic acidosis, or diabetic ketoacidosis.
What is the storage condition for the Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What is Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet?
Acevilda M 500mg/50mg Tablet is a combination of two anti-diabetic drugs: Metformin and Vildagliptin.
Metformin is an anti-diabetic medicine and belongs to the class of biguanides.
It lowers the glucose production in the liver, delays glucose absorption from the intestines, and increases the body's sensitivity to insulin.
Vildagliptin inhibits the enzyme DPP4 inhibitor and increases the release of insulin from the pancreas.
This combination is not advised for patients below 18 years of age.
=

What is Acevil TH 8 Tablet?
Acevil TH 8 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acevil TH 8 Tablet?
Yes, Acevil TH 8 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acevil TH 8 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acevil TH 8 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acevil TH 8 Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet?
The use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acevil TH 8 Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acevil TH 8 Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acevil TH 8 Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acevil TH 8 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acevil TH 8 Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acevis MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acevis MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acevis MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acevis MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acevis MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acevis MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acevis MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acevis MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acevis MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acevis MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acevis MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Acevis MR Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Acevis MR Tablet.
What if I forget to take Acevis MR Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acevis MR Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

What is Acevix SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acevix SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acevix SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acevix SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acevix SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

What is Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acevog P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Is Acewel 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acewel 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acewel 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acewel 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acewel 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acewel 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acewel 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acewel 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acewel 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acewel 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acewel 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acewel 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acewel 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acewel 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acewel 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acewel 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acewel 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acewel 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acewel 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acewel 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acewik MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acewis 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Ace-X 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aceyo MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acezen-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acezen-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acezen-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acezen-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acezen-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acezip P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension be stored?
Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension?
Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acezof-Plus Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Can the use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acezol T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

What is Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage due to long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can the use of Acezoom XL 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
=

What is Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acfac P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Cephalexin is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
Can the use of Acfex 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acfex 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if Acfex 250mg Capsule doesn't work?
Talk to your doctor if Acfex 250mg Capsule doesn't seem to work for you.
Your doctor may increase the dose of Acfex 250mg Capsule or switch you to an alternate option, which may work for you.
What if I don't get better after using Acfex 250mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Acfex 250mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Acfex 250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Doxycycline and Lactobacillus.
Doxycycline is an antibiotic medicine belonging to the class called "tetracyclines”.
It is used to treat bacterial infections in many different parts of the body.
On the other hand, Lactobacillus is a live microorganism which restores the balance of good bacteria in the intestine that may get upset with the use of antibiotics.
Can I drink milk while taking Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule?
No, you should avoid using milk and milk products while taking Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule.
Consuming dairy products along with Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule can decrease its absorption from the stomach, which may lead to inadequate affect of this medicine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
How long after taking Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule can I eat?
It is best to wait for 2 hours after consuming Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule.
Consuming food along with Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule may decrease its absorption from the stomach.
Can I take Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule with food if its causing stomach upset?
Yes, you can take Acfoe-DOX LB Capsule with food if its causing you stomach upset.
However, avoid consuming milk and milk products 1 hr before and 2 hr after taking this medicine.
=

What should be avoided while taking Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR.
Can I stop Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to the use of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR, inform your doctor.
Can the use of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acfylin FM 10mg/120mg/200mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

I have been prescribed Achcoline 500mg Tablet for Alzheimer’s disease.
What is its role, and how does it work?
Achcoline 500mg Tablet is a form of an essential nutrient called choline which is naturally present in the body.
It protects the nerve cells in the brain from damage and also helps to repair the damaged nerve cells.
Therefore, it improves learning, memory, and cognitive function (processing information or perception) in Alzheimer’s disease.
Can I take alcohol during treatment with Achcoline 500mg Tablet?
There are no studies to determine the effect of alcohol on treatment with Achcoline 500mg Tablet.
However, since Achcoline 500mg Tablet is prescribed for stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, head injury, and age-related memory impairment, it is best to avoid the consumption of alcohol.
Can students take Achcoline 500mg Tablet to improve memory and learning?
No, students should not take Achcoline 500mg Tablet since studies show that Achcoline 500mg Tablet is effective only in age-related memory problems, memory problems associated with long-standing stroke, and in Alzheimer’s disease.
Moreover, there is no data available for use of this medicine in children.
What is the role of Achcoline 500mg Tablet in stroke?
In cases of stroke caused due to blood clots, taking Achcoline 500mg Tablet orally can help the patient recover completely within 3 months.
=

What is Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Achenix Aps 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Is Achfri 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Achfri 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Achfri 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Achfri 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Achfri 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Achfri 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Achfri 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Achfri 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Achfri 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Achfri 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Achfri 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Achfri 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Is Achnil Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Achnil Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Achnil Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Achnil Tablet SR get you high?
No, Achnil Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Achnil Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Achnil Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Achnil Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Achnil Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Achnil Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Achnil Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Achnil Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Achnil Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Achnil Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Achnil Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection is a combination of two medicines.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection and oral cavity infections.
Is it safe to use Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection?
Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction, etc.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection administered?
Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection?
The use of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, consult your doctor before using Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection.
Can the use of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection?
No, Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection should be used in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Achtaz 4000mg/500mg Injection may take some time to show its full effect and treat your infection, be patient.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aciana SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Acibio-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acibio-P Tablet?
Acibio-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acibio-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acibio-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acibio-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acibio-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acibio-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acibio-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acibio-P Tablet?
The use of Acibio-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acibio-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acibio-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acibio-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

How to take Acibro Plus Tablet SR?
Take Acibro Plus Tablet SR exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Acibro Plus Tablet SR should be taken after food to avoid stomach discomfort.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acibro Plus Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acibro Plus Tablet SR will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop Acibro Plus Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Acibro Plus Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
Inform your doctor if you experience any problem due to the use of Acibro Plus Tablet SR.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Acibro Plus Tablet SR?
Serious side effects with Acibro Plus Tablet SR are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any side effects like upper respiratory tract infection, fever, headache, pharyngitis, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, influenza.
irritability, restlessness, bad or vivid dreams, sleepwalking, depression, suicidal thoughts, disorientation (confusion), and hallucinations.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acibro Plus Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acicant-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acicant-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acicant-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acicant-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acicant-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acicant-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acicant-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Will I get cured after taking Acicet 800mg Tablet for shingles?
Acicet 800mg Tablet is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
Does Acicet 800mg Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Acicet 800mg Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Acicet 800mg Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Acicet 800mg Tablet?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Acicet 800mg Tablet.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Acicet 800mg Tablet, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
What can happen if somebody takes more than the recommended dose of Acicet 800mg Tablet accidentally?
Accidental, repeated overdoses of oral Acicet 800mg Tablet over several days have resulted in nausea, vomiting, confusion and headache.
Consult your doctor in case of overdose.
Can I get resistant to Acicet 800mg Tablet treatment?
Patients with advanced HIV disease or patients with an impaired immunity have reported resistance to Acicet 800mg Tablet.
If you are not responding to Acicet 800mg Tablet, the possibility of drug resistance should be checked.
=

Is Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aciclaz 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acicloric MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

Acicold Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Caffeine, Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold.
These symptoms may include body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, and runny and stuffy nose.
Are there any foods which I have to avoid while taking Acicold Tablet?
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or food that contain caffeine.
Foods like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate should be avoided as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or have chest discomfort.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc.) while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acicold Tablet?
Store your medicines in a cool dry place and keep them in the original pack or container until it is time to take them.
Store them out of sight and reach of children.
Unused medicines should be disposed of in special ways to ensure that pets, children and other people cannot consume them.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Acicold Tablet?
Serious side effects with Acicold Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acicold Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Acicold Tablet?
It is not recommended to use Acicold Tablet if you have high blood pressure (hypertension), any underlying serious heart condition or cardiovascular disorder, any history of stomach ulcers or overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
However, it can be taken if advised by the doctor.
Its use should also be avoided if you are taking antidepressant drugs.
These drugs, called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may include phenelzine and isocarboxazid or tricyclic antidepressants like imipramine and amitriptyline.
Can I breastfeed while taking Acicold Tablet?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Acicold Tablet.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
=

What is Acicort 40mg Injection used for?
Acicort 40mg Injection has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat many autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
It also helps in the treatment of conditions like rheumatoid disorders and severe allergic reactions.
Along with that, Acicort 40mg Injection is used as an additive in anesthetic solutions as it has pain and inflammation relieving properties.
How does Acicort 40mg Injection work?
Acicort 40mg Injection works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses associated with active inflammation.
Also, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
How is Acicort 40mg Injection administered?
Acicort 40mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Acicort 40mg Injection.
Acicort 40mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acicort 40mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Acicort 40mg Injection?
Acicort 40mg Injection effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Acicort 40mg Injection in the dose that suits your requirement.
=

What is Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule?
Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule?
Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule?
The use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acicurb DSR 30mg/40mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

Acidale Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acidale Tablet?
Acidale Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acidale Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acidale Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acidale Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acidale Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acidale Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acidale Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acidale Tablet?
The use of Acidale Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acidale Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acidale Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acidale Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acidale Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acidale Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acidale Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acidale Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acidip S Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What if I miss a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember.
But, skip the missed dose if it is time for your next dose.
Can the use of Acidip S Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acidip S Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Acidip S Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Acidip S Syrup can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits, and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or taking a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about if persistent constipation occurs.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acidip S Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Acidol P 100mg/500mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is the best time to take Acidoseal 40mg Tablet?
Usually, Acidoseal 40mg Tablet is taken once a day, first thing in the morning.
If you take Acidoseal 40mg Tablet twice a day, take 1 dose in the morning and 1 dose in the evening.
The tablets should be swallowed whole (remember not be chewed or crushed) and taken at least 1 hour before a meal with some water.
Can I take Acidoseal 40mg Tablet with domperidone?
Yes, Acidoseal 40mg Tablet can be safely taken with domperidone as no harmful effects have been reported clinically.
A fixed-dose combination of these two medicines is also available.
Domperidone works by increasing the gut motility and Acidoseal 40mg Tablet decreases the acid production in the stomach.
So, this combination is very effective in the treatment of reflux esophagitis associated with acidity, heartburn, intestinal and stomach ulcers.
Can I take antacids along with Acidoseal 40mg Tablet?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Acidoseal 40mg Tablet.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Acidoseal 40mg Tablet.
Can I take Acidoseal 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Acidoseal 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short term use only.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Acidoseal 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Long term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Acidoseal 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Acidoseal 40mg Tablet?
If Acidoseal 40mg Tablet is used for more than 3 months, certain long term side effects may be seen.
The most important of these is low magnesium levels in your blood which may make you feel tired, confused, dizzy, shaky or dizzy.
You may also have muscle twitches or irregular heartbeat.
If the use is further prolonged for more than a year, you may have an increased risk of bone fractures, stomach infections and vitamin B12 deficiency.
Vitamin B12 deficiency can make you anemic, as a result of which you may feel more tired, weak, or pale.
Additionally you may have palpitations, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, indigestion, loss of appetite, flatulence (gas) or nerve problems such as numbness, tingling and problem in walking.
=

Is it safe to use Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet?
Yes, Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet?
The use of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acidump D 10mg/20mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acifact SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acifact SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acifact SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acifact SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acifact SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acifact SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Is Acifine 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acifine 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acifine 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acifine 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acifine 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acifine 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acifine 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acifine 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acifine 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acifine 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acifine 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acifine 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acifine 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acifine 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acifine 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acifine 100mg Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acifine 100mg Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acifine 100mg Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acifine 100mg Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acifine 100mg Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is ACIFIX 20MG TABLET used for?
ACIFIX 20MG TABLET is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
ACIFIX 20MG TABLET also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for ACIFIX 20MG TABLET to work?
ACIFIX 20MG TABLET starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take ACIFIX 20MG TABLET?
It is best to take ACIFIX 20MG TABLET before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
ACIFIX 20MG TABLET is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking ACIFIX 20MG TABLET if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking ACIFIX 20MG TABLET before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does ACIFIX 20MG TABLET cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of ACIFIX 20MG TABLET can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
ACIFIX 20MG TABLET decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is ACIFIX 20MG TABLET useful in the treatment of H.
=

What is Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acifon Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acigerd 20mg Tablet used for?
Acigerd 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Acigerd 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Acigerd 20mg Tablet to work?
Acigerd 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Acigerd 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Acigerd 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Acigerd 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Acigerd 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acigerd 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Acigerd 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Acigerd 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Acigerd 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is Acigerd 20mg Tablet useful in the treatment of H.
=

What is Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet?
Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet?
Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet?
The use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acigrip 20 mg/40 mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

Will I get cured after taking Aciherpin 800mg Tablet for shingles?
Aciherpin 800mg Tablet is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
Does Aciherpin 800mg Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Aciherpin 800mg Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Aciherpin 800mg Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Aciherpin 800mg Tablet?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Aciherpin 800mg Tablet.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Aciherpin 800mg Tablet, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
What can happen if somebody takes more than the recommended dose of Aciherpin 800mg Tablet accidentally?
Accidental, repeated overdoses of oral Aciherpin 800mg Tablet over several days have resulted in nausea, vomiting, confusion and headache.
Consult your doctor in case of overdose.
=

Can the use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acijen TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

What is Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acilen P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Acilex Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can I take Acilo 40mg Tablet empty stomach?
Acilo 40mg Tablet may be taken with or without food.
It can be taken once daily before bedtime or twice daily in the morning and before bedtime, as recommended.
How long does it take for Acilo 40mg Tablet to start working?
Acilo 40mg Tablet starts working as fast as within 15 minutes from when it is given.
Its effect is seen to last all day or all night.
What is the difference between Acilo 40mg Tablet and Omeprazole?
Acilo 40mg Tablet and Omeprazole belong to different groups of medicines.
While Acilo 40mg Tablet belongs to histamine H2 antagonists group, Omeprazole belongs to proton pump inhibitors group.
Both these medicines work by reducing the amount of acid made by the stomach, to relieve the symptoms and allow healing.
What are the serious side effects of Acilo 40mg Tablet?
Acilo 40mg Tablet may have some serious side effects, but these are rare.
These side effects may include hives, skin rash, itching, hoarseness and difficulty in breathing or swallowing.
Another serious symptom may be swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs.
Inform your doctor in case you notice any of the mentioned symptoms.
What are the dos and don’ts while taking Acilo 40mg Tablet?
Avoid taking aspirin and other painkillers used to treat arthritis, period pain or headache.
These medicines may irritate the stomach and make your condition worse.
Contact your doctor who may suggest other medicines.
Avoid coffee, tea, cocoa and cola drinks because these contain ingredients that may irritate your stomach.
Eat slowly and chew your food carefully.
Try not to rush at meal times.
You should stop or cut down on smoking.
=

Is it safe to use Aciloc RD 20 Tablet?
Yes, Aciloc RD 20 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet?
The use of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Aciloc RD 20 Tablet?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aciloc RD 20 Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
What is the recommended storage condition for Aciloc RD 20 Tablet?
=

How long does Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule used for?
Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin.
It is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Which medicines should be avoided while taking Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule?
Acilox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule should be avoided with methotrexate which is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancer.
=

Is Acimax 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acimax 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acimax 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acimax 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acimax 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acimax 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acimax 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acimax 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acimax 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acimax 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acimax 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acimax 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acimax 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Acimax 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acimax 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What does Acimday 250 Tablet do?
Acimday 250 Tablet reduces the pressure inside the eyes, known as intraocular pressure.
This helps to reduce the risk of damage to the optic nerve responsible for normal vision.
If the pressure in the eye is not controlled, it can gradually lead to blindness.
Acimday 250 Tablet effectively controls ocular hypertension and certain types of glaucoma by decreasing the pressure in the eyes.
Who should not take Acimday 250 Tablet?
You should not take Acimday 250 Tablet if you have or ever had cirrhosis, severe liver or kidney disease, an electrolyte imbalance, adrenal gland failure, or an allergy to Acimday 250 Tablet or sulfa drugs.
Also, let your doctor know if you are pregnant, planning to conceive or are breastfeeding to avoid any harmful effect on your baby.
Acimday 250 Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acimday 250 Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
I feel better now, can I stop using Acimday 250 Tablet?
No, you should not stop using Acimday 250 Tablet suddenly without talking to your doctor.
This is because if you stop the medication before completing the treatment, your symptoms may return or even worsen.
Use Acimday 250 Tablet in the dose and duration advised by your doctor to get maximum benefit of Acimday 250 Tablet.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acimday 250 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acimday 250 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, take it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

What is Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet?
Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet?
Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet?
The use of Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acimol 100 mg/325 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acimol S 100mg/500mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Does Acinabid 25mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Acinabid 25mg Tablet may make you sleepy as a common side effect, especially at the start of treatment.
Therefore, if you develop excessive sleepiness it is advisable not to drive or use heavy machinery.
Can Acinabid 25mg Tablet help with tinnitus?
Yes, Acinabid 25mg Tablet is used to improve tinnitus.
It is a condition in which the patients hear a sound that is generated by the body, rather than by an outside source.
It is usually a symptom of underlying condition or a disease such as Miniere’s disease.
How should Acinabid 25mg Tablet be taken for motion sickness?
Two tablets of Acinabid 25mg Tablet can be given two hours before the travel to prevent motion sickness in adults, elderly, and children over 12 years.
If necessary, one tablet every eight hours during the journey can be given.
However, children between 5 and 12 years can take one tablet two hours before travel.
An additional half a tablet every eight hours during the journey can also be given when required.
Does Acinabid 25mg Tablet cause Parkinson’s disease?
Acinabid 25mg Tablet can aggravate motor function in patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Use of Acinabid 25mg Tablet should be avoided in these patients.
Although, this effect is reversible but may last for several days.
It may also induce a parkinsonian syndrome in relatively old patients and therefore should be used with caution.
What are the symptoms of an overdose of Acinabid 25mg Tablet?
An overdose of Acinabid 25mg Tablet can cause symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, upset tummy, tremors, uncontrollable muscle spasms, muscle weakness or reduced muscle strength, drowsiness, or reduced consciousness.
Young children may also experience seizures.
If you accidentally take too many tablets or if a young child takes this medicine by accident, inform your doctor and seek immediate medical help.
=

What is Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acinist SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Is Acinorm 25mg Injection safe for long-term use?
There is limited data available on whether Acinorm 25mg Injection can be used for the long term or not, but it is a relatively safe medicine.
You should take it for the duration advised by your doctor.
Do not take over-the-counter Acinorm 25mg Injection for longer than 2 weeks unless advised by your doctor.
Acinorm 25mg Injection would be effective only if used for the right indication in the dose and the duration as advised by the doctor.
In case you do not find any change in your condition while taking this medicine, please talk to your doctor.
Do not change the dose or stop taking the medicine without consulting your doctor.
What are the dos and don’ts while taking Acinorm 25mg Injection?
Avoid taking aspirin and other painkillers used to treat arthritis, period pain, or headache.
These medicines may irritate the stomach and make your condition worse.
Contact your doctor who may suggest other medicines.
Avoid coffee, tea, cocoa, and cola drinks because these contain ingredients that may irritate your stomach.
Eat slowly and chew your food carefully.
Try not to rush while having meals.
You should stop or cut down on smoking.
How long does it take for Acinorm 25mg Injection to start working?
Acinorm 25mg Injection starts working as fast as 15 minutes from when it is given.
=

What is Acioff 40mg Tablet used for?
Acioff 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Acioff 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Acioff 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Acioff 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Acioff 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Acioff 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Acioff 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Acioff 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Acioff 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Acioff 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Acioff 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Acioff 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Acioff 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Acioff 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Acioff 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Acioff 40mg Tablet?
=

What is Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acion SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acipact MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Acipan 80mg Tablet used for?
Acipan 80mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Acipan 80mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Acipan 80mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Acipan 80mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Acipan 80mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Acipan 80mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Acipan 80mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Acipan 80mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Acipan 80mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Acipan 80mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Acipan 80mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Acipan 80mg Tablet for a long term?
Acipan 80mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Acipan 80mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Acipan 80mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
=

Can I take Acipep 40mg Tablet empty stomach?
Acipep 40mg Tablet may be taken with or without food.
It can be taken once daily before bedtime or twice daily in the morning and before bedtime, as recommended.
How long does it take for Acipep 40mg Tablet to start working?
Acipep 40mg Tablet starts working as fast as within 15 minutes from when it is given.
Its effect is seen to last all day or all night.
What is the difference between Acipep 40mg Tablet and Omeprazole?
Acipep 40mg Tablet and Omeprazole belong to different groups of medicines.
While Acipep 40mg Tablet belongs to histamine H2 antagonists group, Omeprazole belongs to proton pump inhibitors group.
Both these medicines work by reducing the amount of acid made by the stomach, to relieve the symptoms and allow healing.
What are the serious side effects of Acipep 40mg Tablet?
Acipep 40mg Tablet may have some serious side effects, but these are rare.
These side effects may include hives, skin rash, itching, hoarseness and difficulty in breathing or swallowing.
Another serious symptom may be swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs.
Inform your doctor in case you notice any of the mentioned symptoms.
What are the dos and don’ts while taking Acipep 40mg Tablet?
Avoid taking aspirin and other painkillers used to treat arthritis, period pain or headache.
These medicines may irritate the stomach and make your condition worse.
Contact your doctor who may suggest other medicines.
Avoid coffee, tea, cocoa and cola drinks because these contain ingredients that may irritate your stomach.
Eat slowly and chew your food carefully.
Try not to rush at meal times.
You should stop or cut down on smoking.
=

Acip-Plus Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acip-Plus Tablet?
Acip-Plus Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acip-Plus Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acip-Plus Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acip-Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acip-Plus Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acip-Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acip-Plus Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acip-Plus Tablet?
The use of Acip-Plus Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acip-Plus Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acip-Plus Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acip-Plus Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acip-Plus Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acip-Plus Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Acip-Plus Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acip-Plus Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Is Aciprodol 350mg Tablet a painkiller?
No, Aciprodol 350mg Tablet is not a painkiller.
It is a muscle relaxant that is used to relieve muscle spasms (uncontrolled movements).
Muscle spasms can be due to an injury, sprain, or any underlying medical conditions affecting the nervous system.
What is Aciprodol 350mg Tablet used for?
Aciprodol 350mg Tablet is used to relax muscles and relieve pain and discomfort caused by strains, sprains, and other muscle injuries.
It is generally prescribed along with rest and physical therapy.
Why is Aciprodol 350mg Tablet banned?
Aciprodol 350mg Tablet was taken off the market because there is a risk of abuse and addiction, intoxication, and psychomotor (movement and coordination) impairment with it.
Also, alternative medicines are available for the treatment of muscle pain which are effective and safe.
What are the side-effects of Aciprodol 350mg Tablet?
=

Can the use of Acip-TH Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acip-TH Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acip-TH Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acip-TH Tablet?
The use of Acip-TH Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acip-TH Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acip-TH Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acip-TH Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acip-TH Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acip-TH Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acip-TH Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acip-TH Tablet cause damage to liver?
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acip-TH Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Which is the best time to take Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Take the Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is best to take one capsule daily on an empty stomach.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Use of Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
Can the use of Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Does the use of Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR lead to increased risk of fractures?
Several studies in adults suggest that treatment with Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR may be associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis-related fractures of the hip, wrist or spine.
The risk of fracture was increased in patients who received high dose.
High dose can mean multiple daily doses, and long-term therapy (a year or longer).
Can I drive while taking Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
No, taking Acirab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR may make you feel sleepy, dizzy or could affect your eyesight.
So do not drive or use machines until you know how this medicine affects you.
=

What is Aciraz-IV Injection used for?
Aciraz-IV Injection is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Aciraz-IV Injection also prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
Aciraz-IV Injection is also helpful as a preanesthetic medication (medicine given just before anesthesia) to reduce the chances of aspiration related complications like lung injury.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Aciraz-IV Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
It also helps to cut down on caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
Does Aciraz-IV Injection cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Aciraz-IV Injection can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Aciraz-IV Injection decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Aciraz-IV Injection?
You make see better results if you make certain dietary and lifestyle changes while taking Aciraz-IV Injection.
You can consult your dietician to get a diet chart that suits you best.
Eat at least 3 hours before sleeping to reduce the chances of aggravation of your symptoms at night.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
Refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake and smoking should also be avoided as they may worsen your symptoms.
Can I take alcohol with Aciraz-IV Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Aciraz-IV Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Aciraz-IV Injection, but it can increase acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with Aciraz-IV Injection?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Aciraz-IV Injection.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Aciraz-IV Injection.
=

Acirid DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Acirid DSR Capsule?
The use of Acirid DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Acirid DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acirid DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Acirid DSR Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acirid DSR Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acirid DSR Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Rifampin is an antibiotic commonly used in the treatment of tuberculosis and leprosy.
It has a structure and mechanism of action different from penicillin or amoxicillin (amoxicillin belongs to the class of penicillin antibiotics).
The chemical structure and mechanism of action of rifampin is different from sulfa drugs
It acts by blocking the activity of a bacterial enzyme called DNA-dependent RNA polymerase which essential for important life processes in the bacteria, thereby killing the bacteria
Is rifampin an inducer or inhibitor?
Rifampin is an inducer (increases activity) of an important liver enzyme system that is responsible for the final processing and elimination of several drugs from the body
What is R-cin 600 used for?
R-cin 600 is a trade name for active drug rifampin 600 mg.
Rifampin is an antibiotic commonly used in the treatment of tuberculosis and leprosy.
It is also used in the prevention of meningococcal meningitis and Haemophilus influenza infections.
It may also be used in combination with other drugs to treat infections-Brucellosis, Legionnaires disease or serious staphylococcal infections
R-cinex and Macox plus are trade names for a combination of active drugs rifampin and isoniazid.
It is used in the treatment of tuberculosis.
R-cinex 600 and Macox plus contains 600 mg of active drug rifampin and 300 mg of active drug isoniazid
Can I take rifampin with ibuprofen/acetaminophen (Tylenol)?
Rifampin has no known serious drug interaction with ibuprofen or acetaminophen (trade name: Tylenol).
Inform your doctor about all the medication you are currently taking to avoid interactions that may reduce effectiveness of any treatment or aggravate side effects
Does rifampin cause weight gain/weight loss/ hair loss/ constipation/ yeast infection?
Changes in body weight, hair loss or triggering constipation are not among the known side effects of rifampin.
Rifampin is an antibiotic commonly used in the treatment of tuberculosis and leprosy.
It has no known effect on causing yeast infections
Headache is a possible side effect of rifampin
Does rifampin change urine color/turn urine orange?
Taking rifampin may change the color of your urine (skin, sweat, saliva, tears and feces) to brownish-red or orange.
Rifampin is safe when used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration.
Constant monitoring of liver function is important while on treatment with rifampin.
Taking drugs like saquinavir, ritonavir with rifampin can cause severe liver damage.
Do consult your doctor if you have any liver problem before taking rifampin.
=

Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Dicyclomine and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving stomach pain.
It works by relaxing the muscles of the stomach and intestine by decreasing the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
Is it safe to use Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet?
Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, dryness of mouth, blurred vision, sleepiness, weakness and nervousness.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short-term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
It should be used carefully in patients with alcohol dependency or with underlying kidney or liver damage.
Can the use of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet is usually safe to use in the dose as recommended by the doctor.
However, an overdose of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase the risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine is not recommended in patients with the severe liver disease.
Can I take a higher dose of this medicine than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Acispas 20mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule?
The use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/ bleeding.
Its use should also be avoided in a patient with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I stop taking Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule when my pain is relieved?
Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acithio D 4mg/50mg Capsule be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Why is Acitone O Oral Suspension prescribed?
Acitone O Oral Suspension is prescribed for the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
How should I take Acitone O Oral Suspension?
Take Acitone O Oral Suspension on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
Can I drink water after taking Acitone O Oral Suspension?
Avoid drinking anything immediately after taking Acitone O Oral Suspension as that can reduce the effectiveness of this medicine.
Can the use of Acitone O Oral Suspension cause constipation?
Yes, Acitone O Oral Suspension contains Sucralfate, which can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation if it persists for a long time.
Can I stop taking Acitone O Oral Suspension when my symptoms are relieved?
No, take Acitone O Oral Suspension for the full prescribed length of time even if you feel better.
Do not stop taking this medication without consulting your doctor.
=

What is Acitreat Tablet used for?
Acitreat Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Acitreat Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Acitreat Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Acitreat Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Acitreat Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Acitreat Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Acitreat Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Acitreat Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Acitreat Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Acitreat Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Acitreat Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Acitreat Tablet for a long term?
Acitreat Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Acitreat Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Acitreat Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Acitreat Tablet?
=

How long do I need to take Acitrom 2 Tablet?
You should continue taking Acitrom 2 Tablet for as long as recommended by your doctor.
Depending upon the condition you are being treated for, you may have to take it for several months or years or maybe for the rest of your life.
What should I avoid while taking Acitrom 2 Tablet?
You should avoid alcohol while taking Acitrom 2 Tablet as alcohol may interfere with working of Acitrom 2 Tablet.
In addition to that, avoid cranberry juice or other cranberry products as there may be a risk of enhanced blood thinning.
Avoid breastfeeding or getting pregnant as it may harm your child.
Do I need to stop Acitrom 2 Tablet if I have to undergo a surgery?
Depending on the type of surgery that is to be performed, your doctor will tell you whether to continue or stop Acitrom 2 Tablet.
It will be decided by your doctor after weighing the risks and benefits of discontinuing Acitrom 2 Tablet.
Is Acitrom 2 Tablet same as warfarin?
Both Acitrom 2 Tablet and warfarin are blood thinners, but they have some differences.
Warfarin has a more stable blood thinning effect.
How long does it take for Acitrom 2 Tablet to start working?
It takes a little longer for Acitrom 2 Tablet to start working.
On an average, it may take 2-3 days for Acitrom 2 Tablet to show its blood-thinning effect.
For these 2-3 days, heparin may be used and then discontinued.
What if I forget to take a dose?
If you forget to take a dose of Acitrom 2 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is time for your next dose then skip the missed dose.
Do not double the dose and continue your normal schedule.
Keep a diary or set a reminder, so that you do not forget it often.
What monitoring is required while taking Acitrom 2 Tablet?
The bleeding times should be carefully monitored from 2nd or 3rd dose of Acitrom 2 Tablet and till the clotting status is stabilized.
Thereafter, the bleeding time can be monitored monthly.
This frequency may be more in elderly.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acivas-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acivas-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acivas-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acivas-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Will I get cured after taking Acivir 200 DT Tablet for shingles?
Acivir 200 DT Tablet is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
Does Acivir 200 DT Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Acivir 200 DT Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Acivir 200 DT Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Acivir 200 DT Tablet?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Acivir 200 DT Tablet.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Acivir 200 DT Tablet, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
=

Acivir Eye Drop is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acivir Eye Drop too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
I feel better now, can I stop using Acivir Eye Drop?
No, you should not stop using Acivir Eye Drop suddenly without talking to your doctor.
This is because your symptoms may worsen and your infection may return.
Remember, your symptoms may improve and you may feel better before the infection is completely cleared.
Stopping the medication too early could allow the spread of the infection and hence, prevent complete healing.
In which conditions is the use of Acivir Eye Drop avoided?
Use of Acivir Eye Drop should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Acivir Eye Drop or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy, or if you are using Acivir Eye Drop for the first time, consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acivir Eye Drop?
Keep Acivir Eye Drop in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aciwar P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

How long does Acixone-TZ 1125 Injection takes to work?
Usually, Acixone-TZ 1125 Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Acixone-TZ 1125 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

What is Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acizac TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How long does Acizide-SB 1500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Acizide-SB 1500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Acizide-SB 1500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acklogal-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acklogal-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acklogal-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acklogal-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Aclance-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aclance-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aclance-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aclance-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aclance-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aclance-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aclance-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aclance-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclance-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aclance-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aclance-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Aclance-MR Tablet take to act?
=

What is Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet?
Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet?
Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet?
The use of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Aclav 250 mg/125 mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acliff-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acliff-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acliff-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acliff-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acliff-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aclirene Plus Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aclirene Plus Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aclirene Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aclirene Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aclirene Plus Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Aclobat 200mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Aclobat 200mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Aclobat 200mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclobat 200mg Tablet get you high?
No, Aclobat 200mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclobat 200mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclobat 200mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclobat 200mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclobat 200mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aclobat 200mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclobat 200mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Aclobat 200mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aclobat 200mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Aclobat 200mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aclobat 200mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acloboot Plus 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

What is Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aclocas P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aclodase 100 mg/500 mg/15 mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Aclodol 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Aclodol 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Aclodol 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclodol 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Aclodol 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclodol 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclodol 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclodol 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclodol 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aclodol 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclodol 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Aclodol 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Is Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aclofen 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

Can the use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aclofk TH 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Aclof-TH4 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclof-TH4 Tablet?
Yes, Aclof-TH4 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aclof-TH4 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclof-TH4 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclof-TH4 Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet?
The use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclof-TH4 Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclof-TH4 Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclof-TH4 Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclof-TH4 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aclof-TH4 Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Aclolab-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aclolab-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aclolab-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aclolab-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aclolab-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aclolab-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aclolab-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aclolab-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclolab-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aclolab-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aclolab-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Aclolab-MR Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Aclolab-MR Tablet.
What if I forget to take Aclolab-MR Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Aclolab-MR Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will Aclolab-MR Tablet be more effective if taken in higher than recommended doses?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclolab-MR Tablet?
The use of Aclolab-MR Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Aclomaul 200mg Tablet SR may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

How long does Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet take to work?
The time taken by Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet to start working varies from person to person.
Usually, Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet starts working within 15 minutes.
However, in some patients, it may take up to 2 hours to start working.
It starts acting slowly and the maximum or full effect is usually experienced within a span of 1 week.
In case you do not feel any difference while taking Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet, do not panic.
The medicine exerts its beneficial effects when taken for a long time.
Is taking Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet dangerous?
Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet is usually safe when taken as per the doctor’s prescription.
This medicine exhibits dangerous effects if the medicine is stopped suddenly.
Stopping the medicine suddenly can cause an abrupt increase in the heart rate and affect its activity, which can be dangerous for heart failure patients and can even lead to a heart attack in some patients.
So, do not stop the medicine suddenly and take it for the prescribed duration.
Does Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet help you sleep better?
Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet belongs to the beta-blockers class of medicine.
Though their effect on sleep varies from person to person, it has been found that these medicines are known to alter the sleep pattern and disturb sleep in few patients.
On the other hand, it has also been seen to promote better sleep in patients with increased heart rate and anxiety by calming down the heart and nerves.
Do consult your doctor in case you have any sleep disturbances.
Can I take alcohol after taking Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet?
No, you should not consume alcohol after taking Aclomet-XL 25 Tablet.
=

What is Aclomit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aclomit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aclomit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aclomit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aclomit SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Can the use of Aclonac-D Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aclonac-D Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of Aclonac-D Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Aclonac-D Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Aclonac-D Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aclonac-D Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of Aclonac-D Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking Aclonac-D Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aclonac-D Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aclonac-D Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Aclonac Thio 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Aclonova-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aclonova-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aclonova-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aclonova-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aclonova-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aclonova-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aclonova-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aclonova-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclonova-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

What is Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aclopam P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Aclophar-SR Tablet a good painkiller?
Aclophar-SR Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Aclophar-SR Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclophar-SR Tablet get you high?
No, Aclophar-SR Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclophar-SR Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclophar-SR Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclophar-SR Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclophar-SR Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aclophar-SR Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclophar-SR Tablet make you drowsy?
Aclophar-SR Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Aclophar-SR Tablet?
It is important to know that Aclophar-SR Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Aclophar-SR Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Aclophar-SR Tablet be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Aclophar-SR Tablet during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Aclophar-SR Tablet can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Aclophar-SR Tablet during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Aclophar-SR Tablet may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclopic TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Aclopride-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclopride-P Tablet?
Aclopride-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aclopride-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aclopride-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aclopride-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aclopride-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aclopride-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclopride-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclopride-P Tablet?
The use of Aclopride-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclopride-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclopride-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclopride-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aclopride-P Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aclopride-P Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aclopride-P Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclopride-P Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

What is Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aclorest SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Acloriv 5% Cream is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acloriv 5% Cream too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How to use Acloriv 5% Cream?
Before using Acloriv 5% Cream, clean and dry the affected area.
Gently and thoroughly massage it into the skin.
Be careful not to get the medication in your eyes or mouth.
If Acloriv 5% Cream gets in your eyes accidentally, wash with plenty of water and call your doctor if your eyes are irritated.
What precautions do I need to take while using Acloriv 5% Cream?
Be careful not to get Acloriv 5% Cream into your eyes or mouth.
If you happen to get it in your eyes, rinse off with plenty of water immediately and contact your doctor.
You must not use Acloriv 5% Cream if you are allergic to it or any of its ingredients.
Tell your doctor if you notice any allergic reaction while using it for the first time.
Inform your doctor if you are taking any medicines regularly, to prevent any allergic reaction with other medicines.
Do not cover the area being treated with Acloriv 5% Cream with a bandage, as this may increase absorption of this medicine and increase the side effects.
Do not use more than what is recommended to relieve your symptoms faster.
Using more than what is advised will only increase the side effects.
Let your doctor know if you are planning to conceive.
Pregnant and breastfeeding mothers should use Acloriv 5% Cream only if prescribed by the doctor.
What should I do if I forget to use Acloriv 5% Cream?
If you forget to use Acloriv 5% Cream, do not worry and continue using Acloriv 5% Cream as soon as you remember.
However, if you are not sure and have any other doubts, please consult your doctor.
Acloriv 5% Cream is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Use it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acloson SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acloson SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acloson SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acloson SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acloson SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acloson SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclotab PR 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Aclotem-T4 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclotem-T4 Tablet?
Yes, Aclotem-T4 Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aclotem-T4 Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclotem-T4 Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclotem-T4 Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet?
The use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclotem-T4 Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclotem-T4 Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclotem-T4 Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclotem-T4 Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aclotem-T4 Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aclotrex-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aclotrex-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aclotrex-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aclotrex-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can Acloveta 0.05% Cream be used for a long time?
No, Acloveta 0.05% Cream should not be used for a long time.
The doctor generally prescribes it for 2 consecutive weeks only.
However, the treatment can be longer for chronic (long-term) inflammatory conditions.
Consult your physician before using this medication.
Does Acloveta 0.05% Cream cause severe skin reactions?
Severe skin reactions are quite rare with Acloveta 0.05% Cream.
Acloveta 0.05% Cream is an anti-inflammatory drug which is used to treat skin diseases, skin reactions and eczemas.
However, skin reactions can occur in a person who is hypersensitive to Acloveta 0.05% Cream.
It is important to leave the affected area open after applying Acloveta 0.05% Cream as using occlusive dressings (air- and water-tight dressing) can lead to skin reactions.
The medicine may not itself cause a reaction but the added excipients with the medications can lead to a reaction in some cases.
Inform your doctor immediately in case you encounter any skin reactions.
Can Acloveta 0.05% Cream be used on the face?
No, Acloveta 0.05% Cream should not be used on the face.
In addition to this, Acloveta 0.05% Cream should also not be used on the axillae (armpits), groin, and if there is atrophy (wasting away of tissues) at the treatment site.
In certain circumstances, it can be exceptionally considered to be used by doctors.
It should be used only after consultation with your physician and if possible, the application on the face should be limited to a maximum of 5 days.
Can Acloveta 0.05% Cream be applied to children?
Acloveta 0.05% Cream is not recommended for use in children less than 1 year of age.
It is also not recommended for use in older children and adolescents as the side effects are more common in them.
In the pediatric population, there is an increased risk of suppression of the immune system which may make the child prone to other diseases and atrophic changes, hence it is not recommended.
Still, in some rare cases, the doctor may recommend this medicine, but the treatment is usually limited to 5 days and the therapy is reviewed weekly.
Can we use Acloveta 0.05% Cream in infections?
Acloveta 0.05% Cream is not an antimicrobial or antifungal agent.
It should not be used in infections as being a corticosteroid, it suppresses the immune system and increases the risk of infections.
Bacterial infections are prone to worsen if the infection is covered with a dressing after using Acloveta 0.05% Cream.
In case the inflammatory lesions get infected or there is any spread of infection, consult your doctor immediately.
The doctor will withdraw the use of Acloveta 0.05% Cream and provide appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
Can I stop taking Acloveta 0.05% Cream when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Acloveta 0.05% Cream and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before your treatment is complete.
Stopping Acloveta 0.05% Cream before your treatment is completed can bring back your symptoms.
Does Acloveta 0.05% Cream cause dangerous skin reactions?
Local skin reactions are quite rare with Acloveta 0.05% Cream.
Being an anti-inflammatory drug, it is used to treat skin diseases, skin reactions, and eczemas.
Still, skin reactions can occur in a person who is hypersensitive to Acloveta 0.05% Cream.
It is important to leave the affected area open after applying Acloveta 0.05% Cream as using occlusive dressings (air- and water-tight dressing) can lead to skin reactions.
If not by the medicine itself, sometimes the reactions are also caused by the added excipients with the medications.
Inform your doctor immediately in case you encounter any skin reactions.
=

What is Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Aclovin P 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Acloway P Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Acloway P Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Acloway P Syrup be stored?
Acloway P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Acloway P Syrup?
Acloway P Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Acloway P Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Acloway P Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Yes, Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
The use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aclox T 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Is Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT a good painkiller?
Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT safe?
Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT get you high?
No, Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT?
If you forget a dose of Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT make you drowsy?
Aclozest 100mg Tablet DT can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Is Acmanet 333mg Tablet addictive/ is Acmanet 333mg Tablet a narcotic?
Acmanet 333mg Tablet is not addictive when given at prescribed dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Acmanet 333mg Tablet is a calcium acetylhomotaurinate and not a narcotic
Acmanet 333mg Tablet is effective if used at prescribed dose and duration as advised by your doctor
What is acamprosate/What is acamprosate calcium used for?
Acamprosate or acamprosate calcium along with counselling is used as a therapy to maintain the practice of avoiding alcohol drinking again in people who are alcohol dependent
Does Acmanet 333mg Tablet get you high/ make you drowsy/ cause weight gain?
These side effects are rare or uncommon with Acmanet 333mg Tablet treatment.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR and consult your doctor immediately.
Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR?
The use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Acmeglim-M2 Tablet PR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

For how long should I take Acmerose 20 Tablet?
You may need to take Acmerose 20 Tablet for life or for as long as directed by your doctor.
The cholesterol levels will be maintained only till you are taking Acmerose 20 Tablet.
Stopping Acmerose 20 Tablet without starting a different treatment may increase your cholesterol levels again.
This medicine has only a few side effects and is usually considered safe if taken as directed by the doctor.
Does Acmerose 20 Tablet cause weight gain?
No, there is no evidence of Acmerose 20 Tablet causing weight gain.
If you are taking Acmerose 20 Tablet and gaining weight, consult your doctor.
The doctor may get some investigations done to know the reason for the weight gain.
Does Acmerose 20 Tablet make you tired?
Yes, Acmerose 20 Tablet can make you feel tired.
This is because it reduces the energy supply to the muscles in the body.
However, the exact reason behind the phenomenon is unknown and needs more research.
Generalized fatigue is more often in people with heart disease or those suffering from liver illness.
Acmerose 20 Tablet also causes muscle damage which further worsens the tiredness.
Therefore, you must consult your doctor if you feel tired while taking Acmerose 20 Tablet.
Should Acmerose 20 Tablet be taken at night?
Acmerose 20 Tablet should be taken once a day.
It can be taken in the morning or at night or any time of the day, with or without food.
Try taking this medicine at the same time every day.
Doing this will help you remember to take it daily.
What foods should be avoided when taking Acmerose 20 Tablet?
Acmerose 20 Tablet is used to decrease your blood cholesterol levels.
Therefore, to seek the best results of this medicine, you should avoid foods that are high in calories like fried food and junk food.
It is recommended to eat a low-fat and low-cholesterol diet.
Be sure to follow all the exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietician.
=

Acmetel-CH Tablet is a combination of two medicines that helps keep the blood pressure under control.
The medicine works by reducing the risk of strokes and myocardial infarction (heart attack), thereby treating hypertension (high blood pressure).
Can the use of Acmetel-CH Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acmetel-CH Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some people.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it would be best to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acmetel-CH Tablet?
The use of Acmetel-CH Tablet is considered to be harmful for people with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should preferably be avoided in people with severe kidney or liver impairment and in people with anuria (reduction or absence of urine).
Its use should also be avoided in women who are in the second and third trimesters of their pregnancy.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acmetel-CH Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Dispose the unused or expired medicine.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I come off Acmetel-CH Tablet when my blood pressure is controlled?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Acmetel-CH Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What will happen if I stop taking Acmetel-CH Tablet?
You should not stop taking Acmetel-CH Tablet without consulting your doctor.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience any persistent side effects, talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Acmetel-CH Tablet for a long time?
Acmetel-CH Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Some blood pressure medicines work best when they are taken for a long time.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long will I be taking Acmetel-CH Tablet for?
Usually, treatment with Acmetel-CH Tablet is long-term and may even be for the rest of your life.
Talk to your doctor in case you have any concerns regarding Acmetel-CH Tablet, but do not stop taking it without consulting the doctor.
What if Acmetel-CH Tablet doesn’t make me feel any better?
=

How long does Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR take to work?
The time taken by Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR to start working varies from person to person.
Usually, Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR starts working within 15 minutes.
However, in some patients, it may take up to 2 hours to start working.
It starts acting slowly and the maximum or full effect is usually experienced within a span of 1 week.
In case you do not feel any difference while taking Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR, do not panic.
The medicine exerts its beneficial effects when taken for a long time.
Is taking Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR dangerous?
Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR is usually safe when taken as per the doctor’s prescription.
This medicine exhibits dangerous effects if the medicine is stopped suddenly.
Stopping the medicine suddenly can cause an abrupt increase in the heart rate and affect its activity, which can be dangerous for heart failure patients and can even lead to a heart attack in some patients.
So, do not stop the medicine suddenly and take it for the prescribed duration.
Does Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR help you sleep better?
Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR belongs to the beta-blockers class of medicine.
Though their effect on sleep varies from person to person, it has been found that these medicines are known to alter the sleep pattern and disturb sleep in few patients.
On the other hand, it has also been seen to promote better sleep in patients with increased heart rate and anxiety by calming down the heart and nerves.
Do consult your doctor in case you have any sleep disturbances.
Can I take alcohol after taking Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR?
No, you should not consume alcohol after taking Acmeto-XL 25 Tablet PR.
=

Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acmix 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

What is Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acmor SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Acnac-R Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Acnac-R Capsule SR when my pain is relieved?
Acnac-R Capsule SR, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acnac-R Capsule SR cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acnac-R Capsule SR can cause nausea and vomiting.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acnac-R Capsule SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acnac-R Capsule SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can I take Acnac-R Capsule SR with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acnac-R Capsule SR can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acnac-R Capsule SR helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
What is the recommended storage condition for Acnac-R Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acnecede Gel?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I use Acnecede Gel as a spot treatment (single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnecede Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once daily can help treat your acne.
How long does Acnecede Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnecede Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will Acnecede Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnecede Gel.
It can result in too much medicine being absorbed into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
=

Will Acnecrush-NT Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnecrush-NT Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended instructions for the storage and disposal of Acnecrush-NT Gel?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I use Acnecrush-NT Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnecrush-NT Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once everyday can help treat your acne.
How long does Acnecrush-NT Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnecrush-NT Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
=

Can I use Acnegel-B Gel as a spot treatment (single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnegel-B Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once every day can treat your acne.
How long does Acnegel-B Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnegel-B Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will Acnegel-B Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnegel-B Gel.
It can result in too much medicine being absorbed into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acnegel-B Gel?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acnemend-BPO Gel?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I use Acnemend-BPO Gel as a spot treatment (single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnemend-BPO Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once daily can help treat your acne.
How long does Acnemend-BPO Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnemend-BPO Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will Acnemend-BPO Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnemend-BPO Gel.
It can result in too much medicine being absorbed into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
=

Before using Acneris Cream, clean and dry the affected area.
Gently and thoroughly massage it into the skin.
Be careful not to get the medication in your eyes or mouth.
If Acneris Cream gets in your eyes accidentally, wash with plenty of water and call your doctor if your eyes are irritated.
How long should I use Acneris Cream?
Use Acneris Cream for as long as your doctor tells you.
You may have to use it for several months to clear your acne completely.
Even the initial benefits may take several weeks to appear following which you shall be able to note a gradual but definite improvement.
Usually, Acneris Cream should be used for a maximum of 12 weeks.
You may need to use more than one tube of Acneris Cream during each course of treatment.
What does Acneris Cream do for acne?
Acneris Cream treats and prevents acne by stopping the growth of bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes) which causes it.
Acne is an extremely common skin condition.
During adolescence, grease glands in the skin produce extra grease in response to normal amounts of sex hormones in the body which can cause blocked pores (i.e., blackheads).
When this happens, the pores are invaded by bacteria.
As a result, certain chemicals are produced which go into deeper parts of the skin to produce red spots filled with pus, called acne.
Acneris Cream is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acneris Cream too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can Acneris Cream cause skin rash?
The common side effects of Acneris Cream are irritation, swollen, pale red bumps, and dryness.
A scaly skin rash may occur rarely with the use of Acneris Cream.
You must consult your doctor if it bothers you.
What precautions do I need to take while using Acneris Cream?
Be careful not to get Acneris Cream into your eyes or mouth.
If you happen to get it in your eyes, rinse off with plenty of water immediately and contact your doctor.
You must not use Acneris Cream if you are allergic to it or any of its ingredients.
Tell your doctor if you notice any allergic reaction while using it for the first time.
Inform your doctor if you are taking any medicines regularly, to prevent any allergic reaction with other medicines.
Do not cover the area being treated with Acneris Cream with a bandage, as this may increase absorption of this medicine and increase the side effects.
Do not use more than what is recommended to relieve your symptoms faster.
Using more than what is advised will only increase the side effects.
Let your doctor know if you are planning to conceive.
Pregnant and breastfeeding mothers should use Acneris Cream only if prescribed by the doctor.
Acneris Cream is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acneris Cream too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Is Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule safe to use?
Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule should be used with care since it is associated with significant adverse reactions.
It should be used only for patients with severe nodular acne who are unresponsive to conventional therapy, including systemic antibiotics.
In addition, Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule should not be used by pregnant women because it can cause severe birth defects.
Is Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule a steroid?
No, Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule is a retinoid (vitamin A) which is used to treat severe types of acne.
What are the recommended tests during Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule therapy?
Your liver enzymes and serum lipids will be checked before the treatment is started.
These levels will also be monitored 1 month after the start of treatment and subsequently at 3 monthly intervals unless more frequent monitoring is clinically indicated.
Is the effect of Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule permanent?
It has been observed in many patients that a single 15-20-week course effectively cures the condition and prevents it from coming back.
If at all a second course is required, one should wait for at least 8 weeks after completion of the first course.
This is because experience with Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule has shown that the symptoms in the patients with acne may continue to improve following treatment with Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule.
Why is Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule so dangerous during pregnancy?
If pregnancy occurs during treatment with Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule then, there is an extremely high risk that the baby may be born with severe birth defects.
Can Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule cause cancer?
No, there are no reports of Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule causing cancer.
In fact, it may be useful in some forms of head, skin, and neck cancers.
What are the long-term side effects of Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule?
A normal course of treatment of Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule is 15–20 weeks.
Therefore, the long-term effects of low doses have not been studied.
However, it may have some effect on bone mineral density.
It may decrease bone mineral density in some patients, resulting in osteoporosis or fractures.
Does Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule affect male fertility?
No, Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule does not affect the fertility of male patients.
No significant effects were seen on ejaculate volume, sperm count, total sperm motility, morphology, or seminal plasma fructose.
Does Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule damage your liver?
There may be a transient increase in liver enzymes with Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule use.
Therefore, regular laboratory tests are required.
These values generally return to normal after some time.
If the levels remain elevated for a long time, your doctor may discontinue the use of Acnerus I 10 Soft Gelatin Capsule.
=

Will Acnesol-NC Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnesol-NC Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended instructions for the storage and disposal of Acnesol-NC Gel?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I use Acnesol-NC Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnesol-NC Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once everyday can help treat your acne.
How long does Acnesol-NC Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnesol-NC Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
=

Is Acnewar Gel an immunosuppressant or a steroid?
Acnewar Gel is neither an immunosuppressant nor a steroid.
It has anti-inflammatory (reduces, swelling, and itching) and antimicrobial (kills germs) properties.
It is thought to act by eliminating microbes as well as having an anti-inflammatory effect on acne.
Can Acnewar Gel be used during pregnancy and lactation?
It is not known if Acnewar Gel can harm your unborn baby.
Therefore, it is recommended to avoid it during pregnancy.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns.
Acnewar Gel can pass into breast milk and may harm your baby.
Your doctor will decide whether it is safe to continue or not.
How should Acnewar Gel be applied?
Wash and pat dry the area where you want to apply Acnewar Gel gel.
Apply a pea-sized amount of gel in a thin layer to the areas of your skin that have acne.
It may feel gritty and you may see particles in the gel.
Remember to wash your hands after applying the gel.
How long should Acnewar Gel be used?
Your doctor will decide the duration of the treatment required.
However, it is generally recommended that Acnewar Gel be used for 12 weeks (3 months).
Patients with deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) have a greater risk of developing low hemoglobin level while using this medicine.
But using the gel on the skin does not put enough Acnewar Gel in the blood to cause clinical symptoms of hemolytic anemia (breakdown of red blood cells).
What medicines should be avoided while using Acnewar Gel?
Tell your doctor if you are taking dapsone tablets, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole tablets or any antimalarial medications.
If you take these medicines while using Acnewar Gel, you may be more susceptible to certain side effects.
Tell your doctor if you are using any other medicines which need to be applied to the skin, such as benzoyl peroxide.
Using both these medicines together may make your skin or facial hair temporarily turn yellow or orange at the site of application.
=

Can I use Acnicin Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acnicin Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it everyday can treat your acne.
How long does Acnicin Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acnicin Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and let your doctor know if your symptoms do not improve or get worse.
Will Acnicin Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acnicin Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What precautions I need to follow while using Acnicin Gel?
You need to be cautious while applying Acnicin Gel.
Avoid contact with the eyes, lips, angles of the nose, and inside of the mouth.
This medication should not be applied to cuts, abrasions, inflamed or reddened skin, and sunburned skin.
Wax epilation should not be performed on treated skin, as it may cause skin erosions.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedure while using Acnicin Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Acnicin Gel.
As, the cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

Is Acno 10mg Capsule safe to use?
Acno 10mg Capsule should be used with care since it is associated with significant adverse reactions.
It should be used only for patients with severe nodular acne who are unresponsive to conventional therapy, including systemic antibiotics.
In addition, Acno 10mg Capsule should not be used by pregnant women because it can cause severe birth defects.
Is Acno 10mg Capsule a steroid?
No, Acno 10mg Capsule is a retinoid (vitamin A) which is used to treat severe types of acne.
What are the recommended tests during Acno 10mg Capsule therapy?
Your liver enzymes and serum lipids will be checked before the treatment is started.
These levels will also be monitored 1 month after the start of treatment and subsequently at 3 monthly intervals unless more frequent monitoring is clinically indicated.
Is the effect of Acno 10mg Capsule permanent?
It has been observed in many patients that a single 15-20-week course effectively cures the condition and prevents it from coming back.
If at all a second course is required, one should wait for at least 8 weeks after completion of the first course.
This is because experience with Acno 10mg Capsule has shown that the symptoms in the patients with acne may continue to improve following treatment with Acno 10mg Capsule.
Why is Acno 10mg Capsule so dangerous during pregnancy?
If pregnancy occurs during treatment with Acno 10mg Capsule then, there is an extremely high risk that the baby may be born with severe birth defects.
Can Acno 10mg Capsule cause cancer?
No, there are no reports of Acno 10mg Capsule causing cancer.
In fact, it may be useful in some forms of head, skin, and neck cancers.
What are the long-term side effects of Acno 10mg Capsule?
A normal course of treatment of Acno 10mg Capsule is 15–20 weeks.
Therefore, the long-term effects of low doses have not been studied.
However, it may have some effect on bone mineral density.
It may decrease bone mineral density in some patients, resulting in osteoporosis or fractures.
Does Acno 10mg Capsule affect male fertility?
No, Acno 10mg Capsule does not affect the fertility of male patients.
No significant effects were seen on ejaculate volume, sperm count, total sperm motility, morphology, or seminal plasma fructose.
=

What does Acnomycin 50 Capsule do for acne?
Acnomycin 50 Capsule belongs to tetracycline class of medicine.
It treats the infection by preventing the growth and spread of bacteria.
It kills the acne-causing bacteria, which infect pores.
It also decreases certain natural oily substance that causes acne.
Can I take Acnomycin 50 Capsule during pregnancy?
Acnomycin 50 Capsule should be avoided during pregnancy as it may cause harm to your unborn baby.
Using the medicine during the last half of pregnancy may cause permanent discolouration of teeth and underdevelopment of tooth enamel.
Discuss with your doctor for any further query.
What should I avoid while on Acnomycin 50 Capsule?
Acnomycin 50 Capsule may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
Avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight.
It is advised to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen.
Furthermore, avoid alcohol while on Acnomycin 50 Capsule as it may increase risk of liver toxicity.
Can Acnomycin 50 Capsule get you high?
No, Acnomycin 50 Capsule is not known to get anyone high.
It does not cause dependence either physical or psychological.
Also, it does not have any abuse potential.
Does Acnomycin 50 Capsule affect contraception?
Acnomycin 50 Capsule reduces the effectiveness of oral birth control pills.
Therefore, one should use other methods of contraception while on treatment with Acnomycin 50 Capsule.
Discuss with your doctor if you are not sure.
Does Acnomycin 50 Capsule cause dizziness?
Yes, Acnomycin 50 Capsule may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, visual disturbances, ringing in the ears, and a feeling of spinning (vertigo).
If you experience any of these symptoms avoid driving or operating machinery.
=

Is Acnowin 20mg Capsule safe to use?
Acnowin 20mg Capsule should be used with care since it is associated with significant adverse reactions.
It should be used only for patients with severe nodular acne who are unresponsive to conventional therapy, including systemic antibiotics.
In addition, Acnowin 20mg Capsule should not be used by pregnant women because it can cause severe birth defects.
Is Acnowin 20mg Capsule a steroid?
No, Acnowin 20mg Capsule is a retinoid (vitamin A) which is used to treat severe types of acne.
What are the recommended tests during Acnowin 20mg Capsule therapy?
Your liver enzymes and serum lipids will be checked before the treatment is started.
These levels will also be monitored 1 month after the start of treatment and subsequently at 3 monthly intervals unless more frequent monitoring is clinically indicated.
Is the effect of Acnowin 20mg Capsule permanent?
It has been observed in many patients that a single 15-20-week course effectively cures the condition and prevents it from coming back.
If at all a second course is required, one should wait for at least 8 weeks after completion of the first course.
This is because experience with Acnowin 20mg Capsule has shown that the symptoms in the patients with acne may continue to improve following treatment with Acnowin 20mg Capsule.
Why is Acnowin 20mg Capsule so dangerous during pregnancy?
If pregnancy occurs during treatment with Acnowin 20mg Capsule then, there is an extremely high risk that the baby may be born with severe birth defects.
Can Acnowin 20mg Capsule cause cancer?
No, there are no reports of Acnowin 20mg Capsule causing cancer.
In fact, it may be useful in some forms of head, skin, and neck cancers.
What are the long-term side effects of Acnowin 20mg Capsule?
=

What is Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule?
Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule?
Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
How long will the Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule take to act?
An initial benefit with Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months or more (in some patients) to see the full benefits.
What if I forget to take Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effects.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Acobal P 750mcg/75mg Capsule be more effective?
=

What if I give too much of Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Acocef 50mg Dry Syrup lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
=

Does Acodocet 20 Injection cause weight gain?
Yes, Acodocet 20 Injection may cause weight gain.
It may occur due to fluid retention which may initially make your feet swell and then gradually it will spread to the whole body.
Call your doctor immediately if you notice swelling of feet.
How long do I have to take Acodocet 20 Injection?
You should continue to take Acodocet 20 Injection as long as your doctor advises you.
The duration of treatment varies with the type of cancer you have and other factors like your response to treatment.
You should usually receive your infusion once every 3 weeks.
Can I drink alcohol while on Acodocet 20 Injection?
Acodocet 20 Injection injection contains alcohol because of which you may experience confusion, stumbling, becoming very sleepy, or feeling like you are drunk.
This may impair your ability to drive or use machinery right after receiving it.
Hence, you should avoid alcohol during Acodocet 20 Injection therapy, as it may affect you adversely.
What is Acodocet 20 Injection used for?
Acodocet 20 Injection is commonly used for breast cancer, certain types of lung cancer, prostate, stomach, and head and neck cancers.
It works by restricting cells from growing and multiplying.
Is Acodocet 20 Injection available in pill form?
No, Acodocet 20 Injection injection comes as a liquid to be given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or clinic.
It is usually given over 1 hour once every 3 weeks.
=

What is Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Ofloxacin and Ornidazole.
They work by killing the harmful micro-organisms that can cause infection.
Together they help to treat your infection effectively.
Is it safe to use Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
In some patients, it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, headache, dryness in the mouth, heartburn and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Consult your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to ofloxacin or to ornidazole or any medicine which belongs to the quinolone or nitroimidazole group of antimicrobial agents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms which are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I take alcohol while on Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet?
You should avoid alcohol since it may add to the dizziness and sleepiness caused by Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet.
Consult with your doctor, if you are not sure about the effects of the medicine.
What if I don't get better after using Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Acoflox OZ 200 mg/500 mg Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
=

What is Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acokryp P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Can the use of Acolev 500mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Acolev 500mg Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Therefore, during the initial phase of treatment, avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights, or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how this medicine affects you.
Will the use of Acolev 500mg Tablet affect my fertility?
Acolev 500mg Tablet is not known to affect fertility in males or females.
However, talk to your doctor if you are facing fertility issues during the treatment with this medicine.
I have gained weight since I started taking Acolev 500mg Tablet.
Is it because of Acolev 500mg Tablet? What should I do?
Weight gain is an uncommon side effect of Acolev 500mg Tablet.
However, the response may vary from person to person.
To prevent weight gain you should take a healthy balanced diet, avoid snacking, cut down on high-calorie food items, include more vegetables and fruits in your diet, and exercise regularly.
If you still have issues with your weight, consult your doctor.
How long does Acolev 500mg Tablet take to show its effect?
Acolev 500mg Tablet may take a few weeks to start working properly since the dose is increased slowly.
Your seizures may continue until Acolev 500mg Tablet starts working completely.
For how long do I need to take Acolev 500mg Tablet?
You should continue to take Acolev 500mg Tablet for as long as your doctor advises you to.
Do not stop taking it suddenly because this may increase the frequency of seizures which may be difficult to control.
Will I get addicted to Acolev 500mg Tablet if I use it for a long time?
No, Acolev 500mg Tablet is not habit-forming.
No physical or psychological dependence has been reported with Acolev 500mg Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you experience any side effects.
What symptoms can occur if someone takes an excess of Acolev 500mg Tablet?
Taking an excess of Acolev 500mg Tablet may cause sleepiness, agitation, aggression, a decrease of alertness, inhibition of breathing, and even a state of coma.
In case of an overdose, immediate medical care should be provided to the patient in a nearby hospital.
How do I come off Acolev 500mg Tablet?
The dose of Acolev 500mg Tablet should be slowly reduced.
You may have to take this medicine for a few months before you can stop it completely.
Do not reduce the dose without asking your doctor.
Inform your doctor if you get a serious side effect, such as a severe skin reaction.
Your doctor may tell you to stop taking Acolev 500mg Tablet straight away, even if you have epilepsy.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Aconcef-LB Tablet DT as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
How long does Aconcef-LB Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Aconcef-LB Tablet DT starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aconcef-LB Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Aconcef-LB Tablet DT when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aconcef-LB Tablet DT and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Aconerv-P Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Aconerv-P Tablet SR before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Aconerv-P Tablet SR?
Aconerv-P Tablet SR can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Aconerv-P Tablet SR cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Aconerv-P Tablet SR may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Aconerv-P Tablet SR?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Aconerv-P Tablet SR are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
How long will the Aconerv-P Tablet SR take to act?
An initial benefit with Aconerv-P Tablet SR may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months or more (in some patients) to see the full benefits.
What if I forget to take Aconerv-P Tablet SR?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Aconerv-P Tablet SR and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effects.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Aconerv-P Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR?
No, do not drink alcohol while taking Aconerv-P Tablet SR.
Drinking alcohol can increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Aconerv-P Tablet SR.
How often should I see the doctor ?
You may need to see your doctor regularly if you have started to take Aconerv-P Tablet SR.
However, you must consult your doctor if the advised dosage of Aconerv-P Tablet SR does not improve your symptoms or you continue experiencing some unwanted side effects that affect your routine activities.
=

Aconix Oral Suspension is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aconix Oral Suspension?
Aconix Oral Suspension is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aconix Oral Suspension when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aconix Oral Suspension should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aconix Oral Suspension cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aconix Oral Suspension can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aconix Oral Suspension cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aconix Oral Suspension can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aconix Oral Suspension?
The use of Aconix Oral Suspension is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aconix Oral Suspension be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aconix Oral Suspension can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aconix Oral Suspension helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aconix Oral Suspension helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aconix Oral Suspension preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aconix Oral Suspension cause damage to kidneys?
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet?
Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet?
Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aconmox-LB 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Aconpod-CV Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aconpod-CV Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Aconpod-CV Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Aconpod-CV Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aconpod-CV Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Aconpod-CV Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aconpod-CV Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Aconpod-CV Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Cefpodoxime and Clavulanic acid.
This medication is used to treat bacterial infection.
This medication works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infection.
Can the use of Aconpod-CV Tablet cause any serious side effects?
Aconpod-CV Tablet may cause serious side effects in very few patients (less than 1 in 1,000).
Inform the doctor straight away if you get bloody diarrhea, yellowing of the eyes and skin, bruising or skin discoloration, shortness of breath, widespread rash, skin peeling and fever.
All of these reactions needs urgent medical attention.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR?
No, it is not safe to drink alcohol while using Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR.
Drinking alcohol may lower your blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
Also, it can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
What should I inform the doctor before taking Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR?
Before taking Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR inform your doctor if you have congestive heart failure, kidney problems, liver problems, swelling of the back of the eye.
Inform the doctor if you are pregnant, breastfeeding or a premenopausal woman.
Let the doctor know if you are taking any prescription and non-prescription medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements.
Can the use of Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR can cause vitamin B12 deficiency as it contains metformin in it.
On long-term use, it interferes with absorption of vitamin B12 in the stomach.
Can the use of Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your meal, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always carry some sugary item like a candy or chocolate with you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aconride MP 1mg/500mg/15mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is Acopacli 100 Injection generic/ taxane/ FDA approved/cytotoxic?
Yes, Acopacli 100 Injection is generic/ taxane/ FDA approved/ cytotoxic
Is Acopacli 100 Injection a vesicant?
Acopacli 100 Injection is usually a vesicant (irritant)
Is Acopacli 100 Injection light sensitive/ hydrophobic/ cardiotoxic?
Yes, Acopacli 100 Injection is light sensitive/ hydrophobic/ cardiotoxic
Does Acopacli 100 Injection cause hair loss?
Yes, Acopacli 100 Injection may cause hair loss as a side effect.
Please inform your doctor about any side effect while you are on Acopacli 100 Injection therapy
What is Acopacli 100 Injection derived from?
Acopacli 100 Injection is derived from bark of the Pacific yew, Taxus brevifolia.
=

What is Acoperist Tablet used for?
Acoperist Tablet is used in the treatment of functional dyspepsia.
It helps to relieve the symptoms like bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food).
When should I take Acoperist Tablet?
Acoperist Tablet should be taken before meals.
Always complete the prescribed course of treatment as advised by your doctor even if you start to feel better.
Acoperist Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acoperist Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Acoperist Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acoperist Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Acoperist Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

How long does it take for Acord 5mg Tablet to work?
Acord 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Acord 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Acord 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Acord 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Acord 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Acord 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Acord 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Acord 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Acord 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Acord 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Acord 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Acord 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Acord 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How quickly does Acorset 4mg Tablet MD work?
Acorset 4mg Tablet MD starts working within half an hour to 2 hours.
It dissolves rapidly into the bloodstream and starts showing its effect.
What are the side effects of Acorset 4mg Tablet MD?
The most common side effects of Acorset 4mg Tablet MD are constipation, diarrhea, fatigue and headache.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own after some time.
Consult your doctor if these persist or worry you.
When should you take Acorset 4mg Tablet MD?
Acorset 4mg Tablet MD should be taken with a full glass of water, with or without food.
It should be used exactly as per the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Usually, the first dose of Acorset 4mg Tablet MD is taken before the start of your surgery, chemotherapy or radiation treatment.
Is Acorset 4mg Tablet MD a steroid?
No, Acorset 4mg Tablet MD is an antiemetic and not a steroid.
Acorset 4mg Tablet MD is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
It is prescribed for the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting which is commonly observed after surgery or due to cancer chemotherapy.
Does Acorset 4mg Tablet MD work for seasickness?
No, Acorset 4mg Tablet MD does not work for seasickness.
This is because Acorset 4mg Tablet MD has very little effect on the nausea associated with motion sickness.
=

What is Acosat 100mg Tablet used for?
Acosat 100mg Tablet is used in the treatment of functional dyspepsia.
It helps to relieve the symptoms like bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food).
When should I take Acosat 100mg Tablet?
Acosat 100mg Tablet should be taken before meals.
Always complete the prescribed course of treatment as advised by your doctor even if you start to feel better.
Acosat 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acosat 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Acosat 100mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acosat 100mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Acosat 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
No, functional dyspepsia cannot be cured completely.
But, the symptoms of functional dyspepsia such as bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food), can be effectively managed with medicines as well as a few lifestyle changes.
Practise yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also reduces your stress and hence helps in keeping your symptoms well-controlled.
Try to eat smaller, frequent meals and avoid eating late at night.
There should be a gap of at least 3 to 4 hours between dinner and going to bed at night.
Take more fiber-rich foods such as fresh fruits, vegetables and avoid spicy or oily foods.
Reducing weight can also help if you are obese.
These simple life-hacks can help you manage your condition a lot.
=

What is Acosta 1% Gel used for?
Acosta 1% Gel is used to treat fungal infections caused by Trichophyton spp., Microsporum spp., and Epidermophyton floccosum.
The infections caused could be ringworm infection, infection of feet, or infection in groin and buttocks.
This medicine also treats persistent infection of fingernails and toenails, persistent candida (yeast) infections of vagina or candida (yeast) infections of the mouth or throat in patients with lower resistance to disease.
It is also used in the treatment of cryptococcal infection and infections caused by histoplasma, aspergillus and blastomyces.
Acosta 1% Gel is effective against which fungi?
Acosta 1% Gel is effective against Trichophyton species which cause ringworm infection, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (fungal infection of the skin in the groin or buttocks).
It is also effective against yeast known as Candida which commonly causes vaginal thrush (infection caused by an overgrowth of yeast called Candida albicans).
How to use Acosta 1% Gel?
Before using Acosta 1% Gel, clean and dry the affected area.
Gently and thoroughly massage it into the skin.
Be careful not to get the medication in your eyes or mouth.
If Acosta 1% Gel gets in your eyes accidentally, wash with plenty of water and call your doctor if your eyes are irritated.
For how long do I need to take Acosta 1% Gel?
The dose and length of treatment will depend on the type and site of infection and your response to the treatment.
For example, if you are taking Acosta 1% Gel for athlete’s foot (fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), the dose may need to be taken for 30 days.
While, on the other hand, if you are taking it for candidal infection of vagina, the dose may take about 1 to 3 3 days depending on the dosage advised by the doctor.
I am taking Acosta 1% Gel for nail infection but there does not seem to be any improvement.
No, you should not stop taking Acosta 1% Gel without completing the entire course.
This is because if you stop the medication then your fungal infection may not get completely cured.
It usually takes about 6-9 months for the nail lesions to get cured and after that the new nail also takes several months to grow.
Therefore, do not worry if you do not see any improvement during the treatment.
What precautions do I need to take while using Acosta 1% Gel?
Be careful not to get Acosta 1% Gel into your eyes or mouth.
If you happen to get it in your eyes, rinse off with plenty of water immediately and contact your doctor.
You must not use Acosta 1% Gel if you are allergic to it or any of its ingredients.
Let your doctor know if you notice any allergic reaction while using it for the first time.
Inform your doctor if you are taking any medicines regularly to prevent any allergic reaction with other medicines.
Do not cover the area being treated with Acosta 1% Gel with a bandage, as this may increase absorption of this medicine and increase the side effects.
Do not use more than what is recommended to relieve your symptoms faster.
Using more than what is advised will only increase the side effects.
Also, it is advised to inform your doctor if you are planning to conceive.
Pregnant and breastfeeding mothers should use Acosta 1% Gel only if prescribed by the doctor.
=

What should I tell my doctor before taking Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection?
Before taking Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection, you must tell your doctor if you have or ever had any problems related to your kidneys or liver.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Who should not use Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection?
Use of Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
Can I take Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection in pregnancy?
Enough evidence is not available to provide clarity on the use of Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection in pregnancy.
However, if you are pregnant or planning to conceive, consult your doctor before taking Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection.
You may take it only if prescribed by your doctor.
Is Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection safe?
Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection effective?
Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection?
If you forget a dose of Acostin 4.5Million iu Injection, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose at the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

What is Acotlar 100mg Tablet used for?
Acotlar 100mg Tablet is used in the treatment of functional dyspepsia.
It helps to relieve the symptoms like bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food).
When should I take Acotlar 100mg Tablet?
Acotlar 100mg Tablet should be taken before meals.
Always complete the prescribed course of treatment as advised by your doctor even if you start to feel better.
Acotlar 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acotlar 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Acotlar 100mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acotlar 100mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Acotlar 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
No, functional dyspepsia cannot be cured completely.
But, the symptoms of functional dyspepsia such as bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food), can be effectively managed with medicines as well as a few lifestyle changes.
Practise yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also reduces your stress and hence helps in keeping your symptoms well-controlled.
Try to eat smaller, frequent meals and avoid eating late at night.
There should be a gap of at least 3 to 4 hours between dinner and going to bed at night.
Take more fiber-rich foods such as fresh fruits, vegetables and avoid spicy or oily foods.
Reducing weight can also help if you are obese.
These simple life-hacks can help you manage your condition a lot.
=

What is Meniere's disease? Does it go away?
Meniere's disease is a disorder of the balance and hearing organs in the inner ear.
The symptoms include vertigo, fluctuations in hearing, tinnitus (ringing of the ears), and pressure in the ears.
Along with that, one may experience dizziness which in turn may cause nausea and vomiting.
The treatment for Meniere's disease depends on various factors.
Hence, an open discussion with the doctor can help to determine the best treatment strategy in your personal case.
Acovert 16mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acovert 16mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What are the triggers for Meniere's disease?
Meniere's disease can be triggered by conditions like stress, overwork, fatigue, emotional distress, additional illnesses, and pressure changes.
Along with that, certain foods such as dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, and foods with high sodium content may trigger Meniere's disease.
A 2-gram/day low-salt diet can help control vertigo in Meniere's disease.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acovert 16mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acovert 16mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is stress a reason for vertigo?
It can make many forms of vertigo worse, but will not, by itself, produce vertigo.
What are the causes of vertigo?
Vertigo may be caused either by a sudden drop in blood pressure or because of being dehydrated.
Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down.
Along with that, motion sickness, certain medicines, and problems with your inner ear (Meniere's disease, acoustic neuroma) may cause vertigo.
It is important to know that sometimes vertigo can be a symptom of other disorders (multiple sclerosis, following head trauma) as well.
How long should Acovert 16mg Tablet be taken?
Duration of treatment with Acovert 16mg Tablet may vary from patient to patient.
Some people respond rapidly to treatment while others may take some time.
Hence, it is advised to take your tablets regularly and wait for the results patiently.
Consult the doctor if not sure.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acpa-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acpa-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acpa-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acpa-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acpa-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acpa-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acpa-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

AC-PN Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use AC-PN Tablet?
AC-PN Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking AC-PN Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then AC-PN Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of AC-PN Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of AC-PN Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of AC-PN Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of AC-PN Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of AC-PN Tablet?
The use of AC-PN Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can AC-PN Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, AC-PN Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While AC-PN Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is AC-PN Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, AC-PN Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of AC-PN Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of AC-PN Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acprex-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acprex-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acprex-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acprex-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acprex-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acprex-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acprex-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acpwin 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Acrea 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acrea 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acrea 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acrea 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acrea 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acrea 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acrea 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acrea 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acrea 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acrea 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acrea 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acrea 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acrea 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acrea 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acrea 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acrea 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Acrelox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Does Acricop 50mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Acricop 50mg Tablet does not cause hypoglycemia by itself though it has a glucose-lowering effect.
However, a fall of blood sugar levels in the hypoglycemic range may occur when given along with other antidiabetic medicines or insulin.
If this occurs, consult your doctor who may modify your dose accordingly.
Why does Acricop 50mg Tablet cause flatulence?
Acricop 50mg Tablet blocks the digestion of carbohydrates which causes the accumulation of undigested carbohydrates in the colon.
Bacterial fermentation of the accumulated carbohydrates causes intestinal gas, leading to flatulence and abdominal pain.
Can Acricop 50mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, diarrhea is a common side effect of Acricop 50mg Tablet.
However, this does not affect everybody.
Any food containing carbohydrates, such as household sugar (cane sugar) can cause diarrhea and severe abdominal pain.
If diarrhea persists or becomes severe, then contact your doctor immediately.
When should Acricop 50mg Tablet be taken?
Acricop 50mg Tablet should be taken with your meals and should be swallowed whole with water or chewed with the first mouthful of food.
The initial dose of Acricop 50mg Tablet is generally twice daily.
The dose is then gradually increased to thrice daily.
What if I forget to take Acricop 50mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose of Acricop 50mg Tablet, do not take the missed dose between meals.
Wait for the scheduled dose and meal and continue taking your tablets as prescribed.
Do not take the dose twice to make up for your forgotten tablets.
What will happen if more than the recommended dose of Acricop 50mg Tablet is taken?
If you take more than the recommended dose of Acricop 50mg Tablet then it may cause temporary increase in flatulence (accumulation of gas), diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort.
It is advised to avoid meals or drinks containing carbohydrates for the next 4-6 hours.
Who should not take Acricop 50mg Tablet?
Acricop 50mg Tablet should be avoided by patients who are allergic to it, have severe liver disease, or have inflammation or ulceration of intestine (eg Crohn’s disease).
The use of Acricop 50mg Tablet should also be restricted in patients who have an intestinal obstruction (cramping pain, vomiting, obstipation, and lack of flatus).
In addition, patients who have a large hernia or an intestinal disease where food is not digested or absorbed properly should avoid Acricop 50mg Tablet.
Along with that, Acricop 50mg Tablet should not be used by women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
=

Can the use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acrimol Th 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Acro 500 Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Acro 500 Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Acro 500 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acro 500 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Acro 500 Tablet be taken at night?
Acro 500 Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Acro 500 Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Acro 500 Tablet to work?
Acro 500 Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
=

Can the use of Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Acrocef-S 1000mg/500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

How do you use Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup?
Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup?
Acrocitron 1.4gm/5ml Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

What is Acroflu 150mg Tablet used for?
Acroflu 150mg Tablet is an antifungal medicine.
It is used for the treatment of many fungal infections like Cryptococcal meningitis (fungal infection in the brain) and Coccidioidomycosis (a disease of the lungs).
Additionally, it is helpful in the treatment of infections caused by Candida found in the bloodstream, body organs (e.g., heart, lungs) or urinary tract, mucosal thrush (infection affecting the lining of the mouth, throat, and denture sore mouth), and genital thrush (infection of the vagina or penis).
It can also be used to treat skin infections like athlete's foot, ringworm, jock itch, nail infection.
Can Acroflu 150mg Tablet be taken with oral contraceptives (OCPs) or birth control pills?
Acroflu 150mg Tablet has been reported to have a minor interaction when taken with estradiol (a component of oral contraceptives).
It can increase the level or effect of estradiol when given along with it.
Before starting the treatment with Acroflu 150mg Tablet inform your doctor if you are taking birth control pills.
Can Acroflu 150mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Acroflu 150mg Tablet may cause hair loss as a rare side effect.
If during the treatment you experience hair loss, inform your doctor.
Yes, Acroflu 150mg Tablet is effective when used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Acroflu 150mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Is Acroflu 150mg Tablet fungistatic or fungicidal?
Acroflu 150mg Tablet is primarily fungistatic which means it controls the growth of fungus).
However, it may also act as a fungicidal (kills fungus) medicine against certain organisms, specifically Cryptococcus in a dose-dependent manner, specifically Cryptococcus.
Does Acroflu 150mg Tablet treat urinary tract infection (UTI)?
Acroflu 150mg Tablet is used to treat urinary tract infections (UTI) caused mainly by Candida.
However, bacteria growth can also cause UTI in some cases.
If you are suffering from UTI, please consult your doctor as the cause of infection (fungal or bacterial, or other) needs to be identified before the start of any treatment.
Can I take Acroflu 150mg Tablet with alcohol?
Yes, Acroflu 150mg Tablet can be taken with alcohol.
No interactions have been reported between the two.
However, it is better to consult your doctor on the use of alcohol before taking Acroflu 150mg Tablet to avoid any side effects and get the maximum benefit of Acroflu 150mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acroflu 150mg Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Acroflu 150mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can I take Acroflu 150mg Tablet for yeast infection?
Yes, Acroflu 150mg Tablet can be used for the treatment of yeast (candidal) infection.
However, if you think you are suffering from a yeast infection, consult your doctor.
This is because proper diagnosis is required before starting any therapy.
=

Does Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment have an abuse potential?
No, Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment does not have abuse potential and thus, is not a controlled substance.
Controlled substances have potential for abuse so they need permission from authorities and doctors for use.
What is Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment? What is it used for?
Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment belongs to a class of medicines known as immunosuppressant macrolides.
It helps to relieve the symptoms of allergic eye disease such as pain, inflammation, redness and itching.
Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment alters the abnormal immune response, relieves the inflammation and itching and also helps in preventing frequent flare-ups.
What are the side effects of Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment?
The most common side effects of Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment include eye irritation and burning sensation.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own.
If any of these side effects worry you or persist for a longer duration, please consult your doctor.
How does Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment act?
Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment belongs to a class of medicines known as immunosuppressant macrolides.
It works by suppressing the action of a protein (calcineurin) which decreases the production of inflammatory chemicals by certain immune cells (T lymphocytes).
This relieves the allergic eye symptoms such as pain, redness, swelling and itching.
How to use Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment?
Remember to wash your hands before and after instilling Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment.
Try not to touch your eye with the dropper or the tip of the ointment tube.
Try to use it at about the same time each day.
Use the prescribed number of drops or the right amount of ointment.
Do not use more medicine or use more often than directed.
Do not stop using Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment unless directed by your doctor and try not to miss any doses.
What other precautions should I take while using Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment?
If you wear soft contact lenses, remove them before using Acromus 0.1% Eye Ointment.
Wait for at least 15 minutes before putting your lenses back in.
Do not touch the tip to any surface or your eye, to avoid contamination.
=

Is Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER beneficial in the treatment of fibromyalgia?
Yes, Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER is seen to be beneficial in the treatment of fibromyalgia in some clinical studies, however, Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER is yet to get formal regulatory approval for this condition.
Fibromyalgia is a disease that is characterized by musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, and depression.
What is the benefit of using Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER with paracetamol?
Both Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER and paracetamol help in relieving pain but they work in entirely different ways.
When paracetamol is given with Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER, pain relief is better as compared to single drug use.
However, both can cause liver toxicity, so monitoring of liver function is very important when taken together.
Does Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER cause liver toxicity?
Yes, Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER causes liver toxicity.
Use of Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER is contraindicated in patients with an underlying liver disease.
Can Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER be used for the treatment of osteoarthritis pain?
Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER can be used for the relief of pain associated with osteorthritis and post orthopedic surgery pain.
It is especially useful for patients who cannot take NSAIDs because of the risk of NSAID-induced gastritis.
Does use of Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER cause green discoloration of urine?
There have been case reports that Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER causes green discoloration of urine.
However, this is not a very commonly seen effect.
Inform your doctor if you experience this symptom.
Is Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER useful in the treatment of epilpesy?
Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER is not approved for the treatment of epilepsy.
However, a few animal studies have shown a beneficial effect of Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER for treating epilepsy and this effect is still being explored.
Would I experience any withdrawal symptoms once I stop using Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER?
Yes, you can experience withdrawal symptoms once you stop using Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER like sweating, tremor, and mood alterations with long term use of Acronil-OD 400 Tablet ER.
Inform your doctor if you have these symptoms.
=

Is Acroze 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Acroze 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Acroze 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acroze 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Acroze 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acroze 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acroze 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acroze 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acroze 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Acroze 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acroze 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Acroze 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

What is Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Acsent Plus 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

What is Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acsis TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Will Acstop Soap be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Acstop Soap.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended instructions for the storage and disposal of Acstop Soap?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I use Acstop Soap as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Acstop Soap should be applied to the entire face.
Using it once everyday can help treat your acne.
How long does Acstop Soap take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Acstop Soap may take some time to deliver significant results.
=

Is it harmful if I give a double dose of Actaclor 125mg Suspension to my child?
It is always prudent to stay alert while giving medicines to your child because overdoses increase the risk of worsening the condition or causing unwanted side effects.
Though an extra dose of Actaclor 125mg Suspension is unlikely to do harm, you should speak to a doctor to make sure that your child remains unharmed.
Can Actaclor 125mg Suspension cause serious side effects?
Not usually, but rarely it may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Actaclor 125mg Suspension?
Actaclor 125mg Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Actaclor 125mg Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Actaclor 125mg Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Actaclor 125mg Suspension on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can Actaclor 125mg Suspension impact my child’s digestive system?
Yes, antibiotics are often accused of causing an upset stomach because while killing the bad bacteria they may unknowingly kill the good bacteria too.
As a result, the working of the digestive system may get disrupted.
This risk of developing stomach infections is higher in children because they often have a sensitive stomach.
You can reduce this risk significantly by giving this medicine to your child with meals.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Actaclor 125mg Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
=

Is Actame 20mg Tablet safe to use?
Actame 20mg Tablet should be used with care since it is associated with significant adverse reactions.
It should be used only for patients with severe nodular acne who are unresponsive to conventional therapy, including systemic antibiotics.
In addition, Actame 20mg Tablet should not be used by pregnant women because it can cause severe birth defects.
Is Actame 20mg Tablet a steroid?
No, Actame 20mg Tablet is a retinoid (vitamin A) which is used to treat severe types of acne.
What are the recommended tests during Actame 20mg Tablet therapy?
Your liver enzymes and serum lipids will be checked before the treatment is started.
These levels will also be monitored 1 month after the start of treatment and subsequently at 3 monthly intervals unless more frequent monitoring is clinically indicated.
Is the effect of Actame 20mg Tablet permanent?
It has been observed in many patients that a single 15-20-week course effectively cures the condition and prevents it from coming back.
If at all a second course is required, one should wait for at least 8 weeks after completion of the first course.
This is because experience with Actame 20mg Tablet has shown that the symptoms in the patients with acne may continue to improve following treatment with Actame 20mg Tablet.
Why is Actame 20mg Tablet so dangerous during pregnancy?
If pregnancy occurs during treatment with Actame 20mg Tablet then, there is an extremely high risk that the baby may be born with severe birth defects.
Can Actame 20mg Tablet cause cancer?
No, there are no reports of Actame 20mg Tablet causing cancer.
In fact, it may be useful in some forms of head, skin, and neck cancers.
What are the long-term side effects of Actame 20mg Tablet?
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Actan P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Actan P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Actan P Oral Suspension be stored?
Actan P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Actan P Oral Suspension?
Actan P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Actan P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Actan P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Actavir 400 Tablet? What is it used for?
Actavir 400 Tablet is a medicine that belongs to a class of medicines called antiviral medicines.
Actavir 400 Tablet is used for managing patients suffering from mild to moderate Covid-19 infection.
When is the best time to start treatment with Actavir 400 Tablet?
Actavir 400 Tablet is best taken in mildly infected individuals than in those who have severe Covid-19 infection.
This is because early use of antiviral medicines, such as Actavir 400 Tablet, is seen to be more effective in treating Covid-19 infection.
Delay in treatment only slows down the recovery process and worsens the existing symptoms such as breathing issues, cough, or fever.
If left untreated, this viral infection may even lead to organ failure.
Once tested positive for Covid-19, consult your doctor immediately.
Who should not take Actavir 400 Tablet?
Actavir 400 Tablet should not be used for treating patients who are allergic to Actavir 400 Tablet or any of its ingredients.
Children should not be given Actavir 400 Tablet.
It should not be given to patients with severe kidney or liver disease too.
Additionally, people who have any abnormal uric acid levels or are suffering from gout must inform their doctor before taking Actavir 400 Tablet.
If you are planning a baby, pregnant or breastfeeding, consult your doctor before starting treatment with Actavir 400 Tablet to avoid any potential harm to your baby.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit.
For how long and in what dose should Actavir 400 Tablet be taken?
Actavir 400 Tablet should be taken in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
It is taken orally (by mouth) and the recommended dose is 1,800 mg twice on day 1, followed by 800 mg twice daily up to day 14.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Actavir 400 Tablet.
Can Actavir 400 Tablet be used in the elderly and children?
Since the elderly often have compromised organ functions, Actavir 400 Tablet should be given with care to them, alongside regular monitoring.
Actavir 400 Tablet has not been administered in children.
However, some early experimental data suggests that Actavir 400 Tablet may cause serious side effects in the younger age group.
Therefore, this medicine should not be consumed by the elderly and children, unless advised by your doctor.
Can Actavir 400 Tablet be taken by women who are pregnant or breastfeeding?
=

Who should not use Actee Injection Dispo Pack?
Use of Actee Injection Dispo Pack should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Actee Injection Dispo Pack or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Actee Injection Dispo Pack for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Actee Injection Dispo Pack?
Before starting treatment with Actee Injection Dispo Pack, inform your doctor if you have any other health condition like a kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Is Actee Injection Dispo Pack safe?
Actee Injection Dispo Pack is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Actee Injection Dispo Pack administered?
Actee Injection Dispo Pack should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

How long does Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR take to work?
The time taken by Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR to start working varies from person to person.
Usually, Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR starts working within 15 minutes.
However, in some patients, it may take up to 2 hours to start working.
It starts acting slowly and the maximum or full effect is usually experienced within a span of 1 week.
In case you do not feel any difference while taking Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR, do not panic.
The medicine exerts its beneficial effects when taken for a long time.
Is taking Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR dangerous?
Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR is usually safe when taken as per the doctor’s prescription.
This medicine exhibits dangerous effects if the medicine is stopped suddenly.
Stopping the medicine suddenly can cause an abrupt increase in the heart rate and affect its activity, which can be dangerous for heart failure patients and can even lead to a heart attack in some patients.
So, do not stop the medicine suddenly and take it for the prescribed duration.
Does Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR help you sleep better?
Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR belongs to the beta-blockers class of medicine.
Though their effect on sleep varies from person to person, it has been found that these medicines are known to alter the sleep pattern and disturb sleep in few patients.
On the other hand, it has also been seen to promote better sleep in patients with increased heart rate and anxiety by calming down the heart and nerves.
Do consult your doctor in case you have any sleep disturbances.
Can I take alcohol after taking Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR?
No, you should not consume alcohol after taking Actiblok IPR 50 Tablet PR.
=

What is Acticoal 250mg Tablet used for?
Acticoal 250mg Tablet is used to treat abdominal pain caused by excess gas, diarrhea, or indigestion.
What should I inform my doctor before taking Acticoal 250mg Tablet?
Before taking this medicine, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any other medicines, or if you have liver or kidney disease, or any type of serious illness.
Can I take Acticoal 250mg Tablet with antacids?
It is advisable not to take this medicine with antacids or any other medicines.
This is because charcoal present in Acticoal 250mg Tablet might decrease the effectiveness of other medicines.
Give a gap of at least 2 hours between the medications.
When is the best time to take Acticoal 250mg Tablet?
It is best to take this medicine at the first sign of abdominal pain and discomfort.
Swallow it with a glass of water and do not lie down immediately after taking it.
I am noticing a change in my taste.
How shall I improve my taste?
You may notice a coating on your tongue that might change your taste.
This is normal and is a common side effect of this medicine.
Rinse your mouth with a solution of salt and bicarbonate of soda before mealtimes to neutralize the chalky taste in your mouth.
You can also add extra flavor or seasonings to your food.
How to get relief from diarrhea while on treatment with Acticoal 250mg Tablet?
Food items with soluble fiber can help relieve diarrhea as they help absorb excess fluid from the body.
These food items include bananas (ripe), orange, boiled potatoes, white rice, curd, and oatmeal.
Diarrhea can cause dehydration in the body, so drink 8-10 glasses of water to avoid dehydration.
You can also have soups and juice frequently to hydrate yourself.
=

Can the use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acticross TH Plus 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Actidol-DP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I discontinue the medicine when my pain is relieved?
Actidol-DP Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Actidol-DP Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Actidol-DP Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Actidol-DP Tablet can cause constipation.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation, if it persists for a long time.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Actidol-DP Tablet?
Actidol-DP Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
Actidol-DP Tablet can cause problems when used with the medicine that can cause sleepiness.
It should also be avoided with MAO inhibitors (certain medicines that are used in the treatment of depression or Parkinson’s disease).
Actidol-DP Tablet should not be used in patients who are suffering from severe liver disease or epilepsy.
Can the use of Actidol-DP Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Actidol-DP Tablet is usually safe when consumed in the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Actidol-DP Tablet can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, it may increase your risk of liver damage.
Can the use of Actidol-DP Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Actidol-DP Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
=

Can the use of Actiflox 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Actiflox 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Actiflox 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Actiflox 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Actiflox 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Actiflox 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Actiflox 200mg Tablet.
=

Actigaba-M 300 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Methylcobalamin.
This medication is useful in the treatment of pain due to nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
This medication works by regenerating damaged nerves in the body and decreasing the pain sensation.
The nerves in the periphery of your body, such as the nerves in your toes and fingertip are called peripheral nerves and any damage to one or more of these nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.
These nerves carry messages to/from the brain and spinal cord from/to the rest of the body.
A damage caused to these nerves stops them from functioning properly and the messages traveling between your central and peripheral nervous system get disrupted.
Can I stop taking Actigaba-M 300 Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, take Actigaba-M 300 Tablet for the full prescribed length of time.
Your symptoms may improve before the nerves are completely regenerated and healed.
Can the use of Actigaba-M 300 Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Actigaba-M 300 Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Actigaba-M 300 Tablet as it can lead to severe sleepiness , causing falls or accidents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Actigaba-M 300 Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Actigaba-M 300 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can Actihair 5F Solution be used in females?
No, Actihair 5F Solution should never be used in females.
Actihair 5F Solution is a combination of two medicines, namely, minoxidil and finasteride.
As per the guidelines of FDA, women can only use minoxidil 2% to treat hair loss.
So, it is better to avoid the use of this combination medicine in women until and unless advised by the doctor.
Can I blow-dry my hair after applying Actihair 5F Solution?
No, you should not blow-dry your hair after applying Actihair 5F Solution.
You may use the blow-dryer once you have washed your hair.
But, it is advised to wait for at least 4 hours before washing or blow-drying your hair, as it will reduce the effectiveness of the medicine.
Will taking a higher than the recommended dose of Actihair 5F Solution be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Actihair 5F Solution will not be more effective.
Moreover, it can result in over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause unwanted side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
How will I know if Actihair 5F Solution is working for me?
You will notice that your hair loss will gradually decrease.
Also, you will be able to notice new hair growth that is soft and lighter in colour than the rest of your hair.
Over time, this new hair will blend in with the rest of your hair.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Actihair 5F Solution?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Are there any special instructions regarding storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Can I use Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
Its use can cause injury and death to the baby.
If you conceive while using Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet, stop using it and contact your doctor immediately.
Your doctor will recommend you other ways to lower the blood pressure.
What are some lifestyle changes to make while using Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Actilop H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
=

What if I vomit after taking Actimin 1000mg Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Actimin 1000mg Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Actimin 1000mg Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Actimin 1000mg Tablet.
How often can I take the Actimin 1000mg Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Actimin 1000mg Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Actimin 1000mg Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Actimin 1000mg Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Actimin 1000mg Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Actimin 1000mg Tablet safe for children?
Actimin 1000mg Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
Is Actimin 1000mg Tablet an antibiotic?
No, Actimin 1000mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
Can I take Actimin 1000mg Tablet and ibuprofen together?
Ibuprofen and Actimin 1000mg Tablet are safe medicines, but both should not be used together.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

What is Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Actinac SP 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Is Actinim 100mg Tablet DT an antibiotic?
Actinim 100mg Tablet DT is not an antibiotic, it belongs to the class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug) which helps in relieving pain associated with various disease conditions.
Can I take Actinim 100mg Tablet DT with paracetamol?
Actinim 100mg Tablet DT and paracetamol belong to the same class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drugs).
Taking the two medicines together is not advisable as it may increase the potential for gastric ulceration and bleeding.
However, please consult your doctor before using the two medicines together.
Does Actinim 100mg Tablet DT contain aspirin?
Actinim 100mg Tablet DT is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug).
Is Actinim 100mg Tablet DT safe?
Actinim 100mg Tablet DT is safe to use if taken at prescribed dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Can I take Actinim 100mg Tablet DT for headache?
Actinim 100mg Tablet DT can be taken for a headache only when advised by your doctor.
=

How to take the Actiq 200mg Tablet?
Actiq 200mg Tablet comes as a tablet to be taken by mouth.
It should be taken with food or a glass of milk to prevent an upset stomach and nausea.
Take it as per dose and duration suggested by the doctor and finish the complete course.
Actiq 200mg Tablet should be used regularly as advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it without talking to your doctor first.
If you have also taking antacids, then take Actiq 200mg Tablet at least 4hours before or after these products.
How long does it take for Actiq 200mg Tablet to start working?
HCQS takes some time to show its effects.
It may even take a few weeks or months before you see an improvement in your symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis or other autoimmune diseases.
However, it is important that you be patient and keep taking this medication regularly.
Your doctor may prescribe some additional medications in the interim for temporary relief from the symptoms.
Does Actiq 200mg Tablet have any effect on vision?
Yes, though uncommon, HCQS can affect vision especially if taken at higher doses or for a period of time (> 5 years).
The symptoms include reading or seeing difficulties (words, letters, or parts of objects missing), sensitivity to light, blurred distant vision, and seeing light flashes or streaks.
If you notice any of these symptoms, consult your doctor immediately.
Your doctor may carry out various eye tests and then decide if Actiq 200mg Tablet needs to be discontinued.
You may also be advised to get certain eye tests done periodically if you have been prescribed HCQS.
Do I need to get any tests done during Actiq 200mg Tablet treatment?
An eye test is required before your treatment with HCQS starts and should be repeated every 12 months.
Also, your doctor may advise you to get your blood counts (CBC) and liver function test (LFT) checked regularly.
Your doctor may discontinue HCQS if any abnormality is detected.
Is Actiq 200mg Tablet an opioid, a painkiller, a steroid, or an anti-inflammatory medicine? How does it work?
Actiq 200mg Tablet is an antimalarial medicine with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties.
It is neither a steroid nor an opioid nor a painkiller.
In malaria, Actiq 200mg Tablet destroys the harmful parasite which causes the illness.
Whereas in rheumatoid arthritis, it reduces inflammation of the joints and provides relief.
Do I need to be careful with Actiq 200mg Tablet if I am a diabetic?
Yes, you need to be careful while using HCQS if you have diabetes.
HCQS can lower your blood glucose levels to dangerous levels so much so that you may even lose consciousness(severe hypoglycemia).
Keep a regular check on your blood glucose levels and if it starts to fall, contact your doctor immediately.
Your doctor may alter the doses of your anti-diabetic medications as per your blood glucose levels.
=

What should I avoid while taking Actitel-AM Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Actitel-AM Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Actitel-AM Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any of such symptoms contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Actitel-AM Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Actitel-AM Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Actitel-AM Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure then you can consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Actitel-AM Tablet?
You should not stop taking Actitel-AM Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Actitel-AM Tablet for a long time?
Actitel-AM Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
=

What is Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Diclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Paracetamol / Acetaminophen has an early onset of action which means that it takes very less time to start its action and it helps in relieving the symptoms till diclofenac starts working.
Is it safe to use Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Yes, Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can I stop taking Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Activa P 50 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

What is Active Cold P Oral Drops?
Active Cold P Oral Drops is a combination of three medicines: Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol / Acetaminophen and Phenylephrine.
This combination helps to relieve symptoms of cold like runny nose, watery eyes, fever and headache.
It relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing.
Paracetamol blocks the release of certain chemical messengers in the brain that are responsible for pain and fever.
Phenylephrine is a decongestant which narrows the small blood vessels and provides relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Active Cold P Oral Drops?
Yes, Active Cold P Oral Drops is safe in most patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, sleepiness, headache and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform the doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can I stop taking Active Cold P Oral Drops when I am relieved of my symptoms?
Active Cold P Oral Drops is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your symptoms are relieved.
However, continue taking this medicine if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Active Cold P Oral Drops cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Active Cold P Oral Drops can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Active Cold P Oral Drops cause damage to liver?
Active Cold P Oral Drops is usually safe when taken according to the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Active Cold P Oral Drops can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol, while taking this medicine as it may increase your risk of liver damage.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Active Cold P Oral Drops?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Activmod 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Activmod 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Activmod 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Activmod 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Activmod 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Activmod 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Activmod 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Actiz MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Actkul 20mg Tablet used for?
Actkul 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Actkul 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Actkul 20mg Tablet to work?
Actkul 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Actkul 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Actkul 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Actkul 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Actkul 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Actkul 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Actkul 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Actkul 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Actkul 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is Actkul 20mg Tablet useful in the treatment of H.
=

What is Actnew Tablet used for?
Actnew Tablet is used in the treatment of functional dyspepsia.
It helps to relieve the symptoms like bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food).
When should I take Actnew Tablet?
Actnew Tablet should be taken before meals.
Always complete the prescribed course of treatment as advised by your doctor even if you start to feel better.
Actnew Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Actnew Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Actnew Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Actnew Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Actnew Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
No, functional dyspepsia cannot be cured completely.
But, the symptoms of functional dyspepsia such as bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food), can be effectively managed with medicines as well as a few lifestyle changes.
Practise yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also reduces your stress and hence helps in keeping your symptoms well-controlled.
Try to eat smaller, frequent meals and avoid eating late at night.
There should be a gap of at least 3 to 4 hours between dinner and going to bed at night.
Take more fiber-rich foods such as fresh fruits, vegetables and avoid spicy or oily foods.
Reducing weight can also help if you are obese.
These simple life-hacks can help you manage your condition a lot.
=

Is Actocet Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Actocet Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Actocet Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Actocet Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Actocet Tablet to work?
Actocet Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Actocet Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Actocet Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Actocet Tablet for a long time?
Actocet Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Actocet Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Actocet Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Actocet Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Actocet Tablet
=

Is Actoflam 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Actoflam 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Actoflam 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Actoflam 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Actoflam 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Actoflam 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Actoflam 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Actoflam 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Actoflam 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Actoflam 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Actoflam 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Actoflam 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Actoflam 100mg Tablet?
It is important to know that Actoflam 100mg Tablet may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Actoflam 100mg Tablet may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

What is Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet?
Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Gabapentin, Nortriptyline and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
This medicine calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet?
Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights, or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Can the use of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly observed problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss them with your doctor but do not stop taking Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet?
Serious side effects because of Actogod NP 75mg/10mg/1500mcg Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Consult your doctor if you notice any of the following: changes in body temperature, difficulty in breathing, increased heartbeat (palpitations), weakness, unsteadiness when walking, reduced coordination or slowed reactions, unusual changes in mood or behavior (such as restlessness, nervousness or excitement), signs of depression, seeing or hearing things that are not there, irrational thinking, blurred or double vision, uncontrollable jerky eye movements, difficulty seeing, signs of frequent infections such as fever, severe chills, sore throat or mouth ulcers.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and need urgent medical attention.
=

What is Actomit 100mg Tablet SR used for?
Actomit 100mg Tablet SR is used in the treatment of functional dyspepsia.
It helps to relieve the symptoms like bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food).
When should I take Actomit 100mg Tablet SR?
Actomit 100mg Tablet SR should be taken before meals.
Always complete the prescribed course of treatment as advised by your doctor even if you start to feel better.
Is Actomit 100mg Tablet SR effective?
Actomit 100mg Tablet SR is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Actomit 100mg Tablet SR too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Actomit 100mg Tablet SR when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Actomit 100mg Tablet SR without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Is Actomit 100mg Tablet SR safe?
Actomit 100mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
No, functional dyspepsia cannot be cured completely.
But, the symptoms of functional dyspepsia such as bloating after a meal, pain/discomfort in the upper abdomen and early satiety (feeling of fullness in a short span of time after having only little food), can be effectively managed with medicines as well as a few lifestyle changes.
Practise yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also reduces your stress and hence helps in keeping your symptoms well-controlled.
Try to eat smaller, frequent meals and avoid eating late at night.
There should be a gap of at least 3 to 4 hours between dinner and going to bed at night.
Take more fiber-rich foods such as fresh fruits, vegetables and avoid spicy or oily foods.
Reducing weight can also help if you are obese.
These simple life-hacks can help you manage your condition a lot.
=

What is Actopan 40mg Tablet used for?
Actopan 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Actopan 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Actopan 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Actopan 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Actopan 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Actopan 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Actopan 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Actopan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Actopan 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Actopan 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Actopan 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Actopan 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Actopan 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Actopan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Actopan 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Actopan 40mg Tablet?
=

How long does it take for Actorise 200 Injection to start working?
You will be able to notice an increase in the count of red blood cells (hemoglobin levels) in 2-6 weeks of starting Actorise 200 Injection.
If you have any other concerns, consult your doctor.
Is Actorise 200 Injection safe to use?
Actorise 200 Injection is a medicine that needs to be used with utmost care because it can lead to serious side effects and even death of the patient.
It is important that you seek treatment from a doctor who is experienced in providing Actorise 200 Injection therapy.
Other than PRCA, can there be other reasons for not responding to Actorise 200 Injection?
You may not respond to Actorise 200 Injection if you have deficiencies of iron, folic acid or vitamin B12.
It is important that you take measures to correct these deficiencies.
Other reasons behind not responding to the treatment could be bleeding, infections, inflammation and bone marrow fibrosis.
Therefore, consult our doctor regarding the same.
Can Actorise 200 Injection be used in children?
Yes, Actorise 200 Injection is used to treat anemia due to chronic kidney disease in children who are above 1 year of age.
The effectiveness of Actorise 200 Injection and side effects seen in children are similar to adults.
However, consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Can Actorise 200 Injection affect blood pressure?
Yes, Actorise 200 Injection can affect blood pressure.
During initial therapy with Actorise 200 Injection, blood pressure should be monitored and those who have high blood pressure should take appropriate measures to control blood pressure.
Your doctor may stop Actorise 200 Injection if the blood pressure remains uncontrolled.
=

Actovis-M Injection is a form of vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient which is required by the body to make red blood cells and maintain a healthy nervous system.
It is also important for releasing energy from food and using vitamin B11 (folic acid).
Why can’t I get sufficient vitamin B12 in my diet?
You can get vitamin B12 from sources like meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
While people who are vegetarian or vegan may not get Vitamin B12 as it is not found naturally in foods such as fruits, vegetables and grains.
Therefore, deficiency of Vitamin B12 is usually noticed in vegetarians or vegans.
What happens if I have vitamin B12 deficiency?
Deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause tiredness, weakness, constipation, loss of appetite, weight loss and megaloblastic anemia (a condition when red blood cells become larger than normal).
It may also lead to nerve problems such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.
Other symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency may include problems with balance, depression, confusion, dementia, poor memory and soreness of the mouth or tongue.
Actovis-M Injection is generally well tolerated and considered safe.
However, in some cases, rare side effects may be observed such as nausea, diarrhea, anorexia and rash.
Discontinue taking this medicine immediately if a rash occurs.
How should Actovis-M Injection be given?
Actovis-M Injection can be injected directly into a vein (intravenously) or into a muscle (intramuscularly).
The usual dose is 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Actovis-M Injection) and is given 3 times a week.
After 2 months, 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Actovis-M Injection) is given every one to three months as a part of maintenance therapy.
What precautions need to be taken while administering Actovis-M Injection?
Avoid taking the injections at the same site every time.
If there is intense pain while injecting or if the blood flows back into the syringe, take out the needle and re-insert at a different site.
=

How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Actpill Plus Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Actpill Plus Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain rather than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Actpill Plus Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Actroid 6 Tablet a steroid?
Yes, Actroid 6 Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Actroid 6 Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Actroid 6 Tablet used for?
Actroid 6 Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
How does Actroid 6 Tablet work?
Actroid 6 Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Actroid 6 Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Actroid 6 Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Actroid 6 Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
Is Actroid 6 Tablet a painkiller?
No, Actroid 6 Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
Can I take Actroid 6 Tablet with Tamsulosin?
Yes, Actroid 6 Tablet can be taken with Tamsulosin.
No harmful effects or any other interactions have been reported when they are used together.
=

What is Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule?
Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule?
The use of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Is it safe to use Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule?
Yes, Actsun DSR 30mg/20mg Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
=

What is Meniere's disease? Does it go away?
Meniere's disease is a disorder of the balance and hearing organs in the inner ear.
The symptoms include vertigo, fluctuations in hearing, tinnitus (ringing of the ears), and pressure in the ears.
Along with that, one may experience dizziness which in turn may cause nausea and vomiting.
The treatment for Meniere's disease depends on various factors.
Hence, an open discussion with the doctor can help to determine the best treatment strategy in your personal case.
Actvert 16 Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Actvert 16 Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What are the triggers for Meniere's disease?
Meniere's disease can be triggered by conditions like stress, overwork, fatigue, emotional distress, additional illnesses, and pressure changes.
Along with that, certain foods such as dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, and foods with high sodium content may trigger Meniere's disease.
A 2-gram/day low-salt diet can help control vertigo in Meniere's disease.
What if I forget to take a dose of Actvert 16 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Actvert 16 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is stress a reason for vertigo?
It can make many forms of vertigo worse, but will not, by itself, produce vertigo.
What are the causes of vertigo?
Vertigo may be caused either by a sudden drop in blood pressure or because of being dehydrated.
Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down.
Along with that, motion sickness, certain medicines, and problems with your inner ear (Meniere's disease, acoustic neuroma) may cause vertigo.
It is important to know that sometimes vertigo can be a symptom of other disorders (multiple sclerosis, following head trauma) as well.
How long should Actvert 16 Tablet be taken?
Duration of treatment with Actvert 16 Tablet may vary from patient to patient.
Some people respond rapidly to treatment while others may take some time.
Hence, it is advised to take your tablets regularly and wait for the results patiently.
Consult the doctor if not sure.
=

Is it safe to use Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet?
Yes, Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, constipation, weakness, dizziness, dryness in the mouth, sleepiness and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can I stop taking the medication when my pain is relieved?
Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet is usually recommended for short-term use and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, it is advisable that it should be taken only as suggested by your doctor.
Can the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about taking some medicines to treat constipation if this persists for a long time.
Can the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water on the bedside at night.
You may use some lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet is usually safe to use in the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, it may increase your risk of liver damage.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acty P 325mg/37.5mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects and liver damage.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection?
Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection administered?
Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection?
The use of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Acuclav 125mg/25mg Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How does Acucort 500mg Injection work?
Acucort 500mg Injection works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Acucort 500mg Injection a steroid?
Yes, Acucort 500mg Injection is a steroid medicine also known as corticosteroids which occur naturally in the body.
These corticosteroids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Acucort 500mg Injection increases the levels of corticosteroids in the body by treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Acucort 500mg Injection used for?
Acucort 500mg Injection has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat many conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It also helps to treat autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage), and certain eye disorders.
How is Acucort 500mg Injection administered?
Acucort 500mg Injection should be administered by a doctor or under the supervision of a healthcare professional and should not be self-administered.
Usually, it is given into a muscle (intramuscular), joint (intra-articular), directly into a vein (direct intravenous), infusion or into the area being treated (soft tissue infiltration).
Your doctor will decide the dose based on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Acucort 500mg Injection.
=

Is Acufen 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Acufen 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Acufen 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Acufen 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Acufen 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Acufen 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Acufen 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Acufen 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Acufen 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Acufen 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Acufen 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Acufen 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Acufen 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acufen 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Acufen 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Acufen 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Acufen 200mg Tablet SR be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Acufen 200mg Tablet SR during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Acufen 200mg Tablet SR can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Acufen 200mg Tablet SR during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Acufen 200mg Tablet SR may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acuflam P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Why have I been prescribed Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet?
You may have been prescribed Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet if you had a heart attack, were treated with stents in your coronary arteries, or had coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG).
Is Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet a blood thinner?
Yes, Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet is a type of blood thinner.
It works by preventing platelets (type of blood cells) from sticking together and forming clots.
This action of Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet helps in preventing conditions like heart attack or stroke in people with heart disease, who have recently suffered a heart attack or severe heart-related chest pain (unstable angina).
How long do I need to take Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet after stent insertion?
Your doctor will suggest the exact duration for which you may have to take Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet.
The duration will be decided after considering various factors like the illness you are being treated for, type of stent inserted, any episodes of bleeding experienced by you during treatment, etc.
Usually, Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet is prescribed for a minimum duration of 1 year.
However, it is advised to follow your doctor's advice precisely to get maximum benefit of Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet.
Do not stop the medication on your own, consult your doctor first.
Sudden discontinuation may increase the chances of clot formation in the stent, heart attack and can even lead to death.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet?
It is not advised to take alcohol while taking Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet, as alcohol may increase your chance of stomach bleeding.
As a result, you may vomit blood (which may be bright red blood or black/dark brown like coffee grounds) or you may have bloody or black tarry stools.
Discuss with your doctor if you are not sure.
What is the most important information I need to know about Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet?
Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet may cause serious or life-threatening bleeding.
Moreover, you may bruise easily and it may take longer than usual for bleeding to stop even if you have a minor injury like a small cut while shaving.
Get emergency medical help if you notice excessive or prolonged bleeding.
You should inform your doctor if you notice black tarry stools or if there is blood in the urine.
Be vigilant on any signs of stroke such as sudden numbness or weakness (one side or both sides of the body), difficulty walking, mental confusion, slurred speech, dizziness and any unexplained headache.
Contact your doctor immediately if you develop any such signs of stroke as stroke is an uncommon side effect of Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet and needs urgent medical attention as it can otherwise be fatal.
Do I need to stop Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet before surgery?
Your doctor will decide whether you need to stop taking Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet before any surgery or treatment or not.
Usually, if a surgery or treatment is planned beforehand, the doctor may stop Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet a few days (usually 7 days) before the surgery or treatment owing to the increased risk of bleeding during the procedure.
You should not stop taking Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet on your own without discussing it with your doctor.
Who should not take Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet?
Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet is not recommended for people who are allergic to it or any of its ingredients.
Do not take Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet if you have or ever had severe liver disease, stomach ulcers, bleeding in the brain (stroke or a transient ischemic attack, also known as TIA), or if you have a bleeding disorder known as hemophilia (disease in which blood does not clot normally).
Additionally, avoid taking Acugrel AS 75mg/75mg Tablet if you are trying to get pregnant, already pregnant, or breastfeeding.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aculum SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aculum SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aculum SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aculum SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aculum SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aculum SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aculum SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Aculum SP Tablet than recommended?
=

My friend has a history of epilepsy and she was on valproic acid while receiving treatment with Acupenem 500mg Injection, still, she had an episode of seizure.
Any previous history with any other medication should be informed to the doctor before starting your treatment with Acupenem 500mg Injection.
Medicines like Acupenem 500mg Injection can interfere with valproic acid which is used for the treatment of epilepsy, making it less effective.
So, the reason for the recent episode of seizure could be the result of such drug interaction.
Generally, in cases like these, the doctor prescribes a different medicine.
Even though Acupenem 500mg Injection is used for skin infections, can it cause any skin-related problems?
Serious skin reactions are rare, but some have been reported with the use of Acupenem 500mg Injection.
Therefore, before starting the treatment inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicine or antibiotic.
Serious skin reactions are a type of allergic reaction.
But, if not properly managed then they can endanger life.
So, if you notice any rash along with fever or peeling of the skin, discontinue the medication and inform your doctor.
Is Acupenem 500mg Injection a strong antibiotic? Which infections does it treat?
Acupenem 500mg Injection is a broad-spectrum antibiotic which means it can treat a variety of bacterial infections.
It is used to treat infections affecting the lungs (pneumonia) and complicated infections of the urinary tract, abdomen, and skin and soft tissue infections.
Along with that, it is also helpful in treating bacterial infection of the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) and infections that occur during or after delivery.
Is Acupenem 500mg Injection effective against bacteria only? Can it be used for any type of bacterial infection?
Yes, Acupenem 500mg Injection is effective only against bacteria.
It is not effective against virus or fungal infections.
Acupenem 500mg Injection is effective against some bacteria which include Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S.
Therefore, its use against any other type of bacteria should be avoided.
My cousin was receiving Acupenem 500mg Injection for severe skin infection, but the medicine was stopped when she had a fit.
Was the fit due to Acupenem 500mg Injection?
There are reports which suggest the occurrence of seizures or fits with the use of Acupenem 500mg Injection.
However, fits are more likely to occur in patients with a history of seizures or a brain lesion (wound, ulcer, abscess or tumor) or patients having bacterial meningitis or compromised kidney function.
Consult your doctor to understand the exact reason.
For how long will I need to take Acupenem 500mg Injection?
=

Who should not take Acupressin 1mg Injection?
Acupressin 1mg Injection should not be given to anyone with a known allergy or hypersensitivity to Acupressin 1mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Acupressin 1mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Acupressin 1mg Injection, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidney or liver-related issues, breathing issues like asthma, heart related ailments like uncontrollable or high blood pressure, irregular heartbeat, etc.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
How do you give Acupressin 1mg Injection?
Acupressin 1mg Injection is given by a doctor or nurse into the muscle or under the skin.
The dose will depend on the body weight of the patient and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Acupressin 1mg Injection.
Can Acupressin 1mg Injection be used in children?
There is not enough data available for its use in children.
=

What is Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Acu T 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acutiva-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acutiva-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acutiva-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acutiva-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acutiva-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acutiva-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Acutiva-SP Tablet than recommended?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Acutiva-SP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

How long does Acutrax TZ 250mg/31.25mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Acutrax TZ 250mg/31.25mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Acutrax TZ 250mg/31.25mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Is Acutrol C 800 Tablet taken with food?
Yes, Acutrol C 800 Tablet can be taken with food.
It is recommended to take 1-2 tablets (based on individual needs) thrice daily.
It is important to take it with meals because Acutrol C 800 Tablet works by binding to phosphate from food.
Take it exactly as advised by your doctor.
Can Acutrol C 800 Tablet be crushed?
No, you should not crush, chew, or break Acutrol C 800 Tablet into pieces.
You should swallow it as a whole with water.
Why is it important for me to take Acutrol C 800 Tablet?
It is important to take Acutrol C 800 Tablet as patients undergoing dialysis cannot control the phosphate levels in their blood, especially after a meal.
When the level of phosphate exceeds above the range in the blood, it may cause problems such as itchy skin, red eyes, high blood pressure, bone pain, and also increase the risk of fractures.
These increased serum phosphate levels are reduced by Acutrol C 800 Tablet, as it binds phosphate from food in the digestive tract.
Does Acutrol C 800 Tablet cause constipation?
A common side effect of Acutrol C 800 Tablet is constipation, though it does not occur in everyone.
The other common side effects of the stomach and intestine include diarrhea, indigestion, flatulence, and pain in the abdomen.
Immediately consult your doctor if these side effects become severe and disturb you.
Who should not take Acutrol C 800 Tablet?
Patients who are allergic to Acutrol C 800 Tablet and who have low levels of phosphate in blood should avoid taking Acutrol C 800 Tablet.
Additionally, patients having intestinal obstruction should also avoid using Acutrol C 800 Tablet.
Can I take ciprofloxacin while I am taking Acutrol C 800 Tablet?
Ciprofloxacin may interfere with the working of Acutrol C 800 Tablet and therefore it should not be taken at the same time as Acutrol C 800 Tablet.
However, if taken together then a gap of at least 2 hours before or 6 hours after taking Acutrol C 800 Tablet should be maintained.
=

Acuzith 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Acuzith 250mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Acuzith 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Acuzith 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Acuzith 250mg Tablet be taken at night?
Acuzith 250mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Acuzith 250mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Acuzith 250mg Tablet to work?
Acuzith 250mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Acuzith 250mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Acuzith 250mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Acuzith 250mg Tablet?
=

Acvin Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acvin Tablet?
Acvin Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acvin Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acvin Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acvin Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acvin Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acvin Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acvin Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acvin Tablet?
The use of Acvin Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet lead to hypoglycemia?
The use of Acvlglip-M Tablet does not usually cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) alone.
But it could occur if there is insufficient supplementation of calories while taking this medicine.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
The symptoms are more likely to be noticed if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise, or take any other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar levels is important.
It is recommended to always carry glucose tablets, honey, or fruit juice with you.
Can the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark-colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet?
The use of Acvlglip-M Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergies to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also considered to be harmful to patients with severe kidney impairment, liver impairment, congestive heart failure, lactic acidosis, or diabetic ketoacidosis.
What is the storage condition for the Acvlglip-M Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
Acvlglip-M Tablet is a combination of two anti-diabetic drugs: Metformin and Vildagliptin.
Metformin is an anti-diabetic medicine and belongs to the class of biguanides.
It lowers the glucose production in the liver, delays glucose absorption from the intestines, and increases the body's sensitivity to insulin.
Vildagliptin inhibits the enzyme DPP4 inhibitor and increases the release of insulin from the pancreas.
This combination is not advised for patients below 18 years of age.
Can the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet cause lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency that is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a very rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is avoided in patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients, or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Acvlglip-M Tablet and immediately consult your doctor.
Can the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Acvlglip-M Tablet can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency with long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems.
Is it safe to use Acvlglip-M Tablet?
Yes, it is safe to use Acvlglip-M Tablet if you take it for the prescribed duration and according to the dosage advised by the doctor.
However, despite taking the prescribed dosage you might experience common side effects like nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, stomach upset, headache, nasal congestion, sore throat, respiratory tract infection, hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) in combination with insulin or sulphonylurea.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
=

What is Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Acwan P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Is Acwis 20mg Tablet safe to use?
Acwis 20mg Tablet should be used with care since it is associated with significant adverse reactions.
It should be used only for patients with severe nodular acne who are unresponsive to conventional therapy, including systemic antibiotics.
In addition, Acwis 20mg Tablet should not be used by pregnant women because it can cause severe birth defects.
Is Acwis 20mg Tablet a steroid?
No, Acwis 20mg Tablet is a retinoid (vitamin A) which is used to treat severe types of acne.
What are the recommended tests during Acwis 20mg Tablet therapy?
Your liver enzymes and serum lipids will be checked before the treatment is started.
These levels will also be monitored 1 month after the start of treatment and subsequently at 3 monthly intervals unless more frequent monitoring is clinically indicated.
Is the effect of Acwis 20mg Tablet permanent?
It has been observed in many patients that a single 15-20-week course effectively cures the condition and prevents it from coming back.
If at all a second course is required, one should wait for at least 8 weeks after completion of the first course.
This is because experience with Acwis 20mg Tablet has shown that the symptoms in the patients with acne may continue to improve following treatment with Acwis 20mg Tablet.
Why is Acwis 20mg Tablet so dangerous during pregnancy?
If pregnancy occurs during treatment with Acwis 20mg Tablet then, there is an extremely high risk that the baby may be born with severe birth defects.
Can Acwis 20mg Tablet cause cancer?
No, there are no reports of Acwis 20mg Tablet causing cancer.
In fact, it may be useful in some forms of head, skin, and neck cancers.
What are the long-term side effects of Acwis 20mg Tablet?
A normal course of treatment of Acwis 20mg Tablet is 15–20 weeks.
Therefore, the long-term effects of low doses have not been studied.
However, it may have some effect on bone mineral density.
It may decrease bone mineral density in some patients, resulting in osteoporosis or fractures.
Does Acwis 20mg Tablet affect male fertility?
No, Acwis 20mg Tablet does not affect the fertility of male patients.
No significant effects were seen on ejaculate volume, sperm count, total sperm motility, morphology, or seminal plasma fructose.
Does Acwis 20mg Tablet damage your liver?
There may be a transient increase in liver enzymes with Acwis 20mg Tablet use.
Therefore, regular laboratory tests are required.
These values generally return to normal after some time.
If the levels remain elevated for a long time, your doctor may discontinue the use of Acwis 20mg Tablet.
=

Will I get cured after taking Acycloveer G 250mg Injection for shingles?
Acycloveer G 250mg Injection is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
How is Acycloveer G 250mg Injection administered?
Acycloveer G 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
It is given by slow intravenous (I.V) infusion over a one hour period to avoid damage to kidneys.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Acycloveer G 250mg Injection.
Does Acycloveer G 250mg Injection prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Acycloveer G 250mg Injection.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Acycloveer G 250mg Injection?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Acycloveer G 250mg Injection?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Acycloveer G 250mg Injection.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Acycloveer G 250mg Injection, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
=

What is Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Acycov SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Will I get cured after taking Acylovir 200mg Tablet for shingles?
Acylovir 200mg Tablet is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
Does Acylovir 200mg Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Acylovir 200mg Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Acylovir 200mg Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Acylovir 200mg Tablet?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Acylovir 200mg Tablet.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Acylovir 200mg Tablet, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
What can happen if somebody takes more than the recommended dose of Acylovir 200mg Tablet accidentally?
Accidental, repeated overdoses of oral Acylovir 200mg Tablet over several days have resulted in nausea, vomiting, confusion and headache.
Consult your doctor in case of overdose.
Can I get resistant to Acylovir 200mg Tablet treatment?
Patients with advanced HIV disease or patients with an impaired immunity have reported resistance to Acylovir 200mg Tablet.
If you are not responding to Acylovir 200mg Tablet, the possibility of drug resistance should be checked.
=

What is AC ZAN P Tablet?
AC ZAN P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use AC ZAN P Tablet?
AC ZAN P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking AC ZAN P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then AC ZAN P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of AC ZAN P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of AC ZAN P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of AC ZAN P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of AC ZAN P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of AC ZAN P Tablet?
The use of AC ZAN P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can AC ZAN P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, AC ZAN P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While AC ZAN P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is AC ZAN P Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, AC ZAN P Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of AC ZAN P Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of AC ZAN P Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Can I use Adacare Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Adacare Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it everyday can treat your acne.
How long does Adacare Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Adacare Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and let your doctor know if your symptoms do not improve or get worse.
Will Adacare Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Adacare Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What precautions I need to follow while using Adacare Gel?
You need to be cautious while applying Adacare Gel.
Avoid contact with the eyes, lips, angles of the nose, and inside of the mouth.
This medication should not be applied to cuts, abrasions, inflamed or reddened skin, and sunburned skin.
Wax epilation should not be performed on treated skin, as it may cause skin erosions.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedure while using Adacare Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Adacare Gel.
As, the cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
What should I avoid while using Adacare Gel?
Adacare Gel makes skin sensitive, so you should avoid spending time in sunlight.
If you have to be in sunlight, you should wear sunscreen and wear a hat and clothes that cover the areas treated with Adacare Gel.
You should avoid weather extremes such as wind and cold, as this may irritate your skin.
Some skin products, such as harsh soaps, astringents, cosmetics that have strong skin-drying effects, should be avoided.
In addition, products containing high levels of alcohol should be avoided, as they may further dry or irritate your skin.
=

Is Adakem 0.1% Gel safe to be used in pregnancy?
No, Adakem 0.1% Gel should not be used during pregnancy.
However, if during the treatment you became pregnant, discontinue the medicine immediately and consult your doctor.
Do not plan a pregnancy while using Adakem 0.1% Gel.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Adakem 0.1% Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Adakem 0.1% Gel.
As cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is it normal to have a burning sensation after applying Adakem 0.1% Gel?
Yes, it is common to experience burning sensation with the use of Adakem 0.1% Gel.
You may also experience redness, drying, and scaling during the first 4 weeks of treatment which usually lessen with continued use of Adakem 0.1% Gel.
Inform your doctor if the side effects bother you or do not improve.
How long does it take to see results from Adakem 0.1% Gel?
You may start noticing an improvement after two weeks of therapy, but a minimum of eight weeks are required to notice consistent beneficial effects.
How does Adakem 0.1% Gel help acne?
Adakem 0.1% Gel has anti-inflammatory action which reduces soreness and irritation.
It is used for the treatment of acne of the face, chest, or back and may also help in reducing blackheads, and whiteheads.
It helps in the treatment of abnormal skin processes associated with acne.
Can I use moisturiser after Adakem 0.1% Gel?
Moisturizers may be used, if necessary; however, products containing alpha hydroxy or glycolic acids should be avoided.
=

Can the use of Adaliz 600mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adaliz 600mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What foods should I avoid while taking Adaliz 600mg Tablet?
You should avoid taking large quantities of food that contain high tyramine in it.
Foods that are fermented, cured, aged or spoiled contain high amount of tyramine e.g cheese, red wine, pickle, over ripe fruits etc.
=

Can I use Adapic C Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Adapic C Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it everyday can treat your acne.
How long does Adapic C Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Adapic C Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and let your doctor know if your symptoms do not improve or get worse.
Will Adapic C Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Adapic C Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What precautions I need to follow while using Adapic C Gel?
You need to be cautious while applying Adapic C Gel.
Avoid contact with the eyes, lips, angles of the nose, and inside of the mouth.
This medication should not be applied to cuts, abrasions, inflamed or reddened skin, and sunburned skin.
Wax epilation should not be performed on treated skin, as it may cause skin erosions.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedure while using Adapic C Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Adapic C Gel.
As, the cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
What should I avoid while using Adapic C Gel?
Adapic C Gel makes skin sensitive, so you should avoid spending time in sunlight.
If you have to be in sunlight, you should wear sunscreen and wear a hat and clothes that cover the areas treated with Adapic C Gel.
You should avoid weather extremes such as wind and cold, as this may irritate your skin.
Some skin products, such as harsh soaps, astringents, cosmetics that have strong skin-drying effects, should be avoided.
In addition, products containing high levels of alcohol should be avoided, as they may further dry or irritate your skin.
=

How many hours does ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET take to reduce high blood pressure?
Usually, ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET starts working within 3 hours, but it can take up to 2 weeks to reach its full effect.
You may not feel any difference in blood pressure after taking the medicine, but this does not mean that the medicine is not working.
It is important to keep taking your medicine in the prescribed dose and duration to get the maximum benefit of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET.
Should I take ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET in the morning or at night?
ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET can be taken anytime in the morning or evening, usually prescribed once or twice daily.
However, your very first dose of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET may make you feel dizzy, so it is better to take your first dose at bedtime.
After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you may take it any time of the day.
Follow the advice of your doctor.
It is advised to take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
What if I forget to take a dose of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET?
If you have missed a dose of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What if I take more than the prescribed dose of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET?
If you take more than the prescribed dose, your heart rate may slow down and you may find it difficult to breathe.
It can also cause dizziness and trembling.
If you experience any of such side effects, seek immediate medical assistance.
Avoid driving yourself to avoid any mishap.
Get someone else to drive you or call for an ambulance.
Take the ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET packet or leaflet inside it, plus any remaining medicine, with you.
What are the most common side effects of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET?
The most common side effects of ADBETA 12.5MG TABLET include cold extremities (feeling extreme cold), fatigue, slow heart rate, nausea, diarrhea and dizziness.
However, these are usually mild and short-lived and not everyone will experience these side effects.
But, if these do not resolve and bother you, consult your doctor to know about ways of coping up with them.
Your doctor may also suggest ways of preventing them in future.
=

What is the right way to use Adbrom Free Eye Drop?
Always wash your hands before (and after) using Adbrom Free Eye Drop.
This prevents you from passing the infection from one eye to the other.
Remove the cap just before using your medicine and replace it as soon as you have finished.
Avoid touching the nozzle of the bottle with your fingers.
Tilt your head back and gently pull down your lower eyelid with a clean finger.
Hold the bottle over the eye and allow a single drop to fall into the space between your lower lid and your eye.
Close your eye and gently press your finger over the inside corner of your eye (over the eyelid) for about a minute.
This helps prevent the drop from draining out of the eye.
Repeat in your other eye if your doctor has told you to do this.
How often can I use Adbrom Free Eye Drop?
Instill one drop into the affected eye(s) once daily beginning 1 day prior to surgery, continued on the day of surgery, and through the first 14 days post-surgery.
However, follow your doctor's instructions regarding dosage since it may vary from patient to patient.
When should I seek a doctor’s advice?
You should contact your doctor immediately if you develop abnormal sensations in the eye, eye irritation (including burning/stinging), eye pain, eye allergy, eye redness, headache, and iritis (inflammation of the colored part of your eye).
Can I use any other eye drop along with Adbrom Free Eye Drop?
Always consult your doctor before using any other eye drops along with Adbrom Free Eye Drop.
It is advisable to give a gap of atleast 5 minutes between the two medications.
Can I use any other topical pain relieving medicine while using Adbrom Free Eye Drop?
Use of any other topical pain relieving medicine with Adbrom Free Eye Drop may slow or delay healing of your operated eye.
Consult your doctor in case of any doubts.
=

Can Adcef 125mg Tablet DT be given to children who are less than 5 months of age?
Safety and efficacy data in neonates and infants less than 6 months of age have not yet been established, so avoid giving it to kids younger than 6 months of age.
Can giving oral nutrition supplements (infant formula) interfere with the absorption of Adcef 125mg Tablet DT?
Infant formula does not cause any significant interference with the absorption of Adcef 125mg Tablet DT.
Therefore, this medicine can be given with oral nutrition supplements (infant formula or baby milk).
What will happen if I give an excess of Adcef 125mg Tablet DT to my child?
Even though an extra dose of Adcef 125mg Tablet DT is unlikely to harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Adcef 125mg Tablet DT to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Can Adcef 125mg Tablet DT cause serious side effects in my child?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, severe gastrointestinal infections, blood cell count abnormalities, impaired glucose in blood, and electrolyte abnormalities.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
My child has type 1 diabetes and is on insulin therapy.
Is it safe to give Adcef 125mg Tablet DT to my child?
No, Adcef 125mg Tablet DT can cause disturbed glucose levels in the blood.
Therefore, it is not advised to give Adcef 125mg Tablet DT if your child is diabetic.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Adcef 125mg Tablet DT?
Adcef 125mg Tablet DT can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Adcef 125mg Tablet DT.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
My child is suffering from anemia and is on oral iron therapy.
Is it safe to give Adcef 125mg Tablet DT along with it?
It is not advised to give Adcef 125mg Tablet DT with oral iron therapy as it binds to iron preparation in your child’s digestive system and can result in reddish stools.
=

Can I use Adcin Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Adcin Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it everyday can treat your acne.
How long does Adcin Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Adcin Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and let your doctor know if your symptoms do not improve or get worse.
Will Adcin Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Adcin Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What precautions I need to follow while using Adcin Gel?
You need to be cautious while applying Adcin Gel.
Avoid contact with the eyes, lips, angles of the nose, and inside of the mouth.
This medication should not be applied to cuts, abrasions, inflamed or reddened skin, and sunburned skin.
Wax epilation should not be performed on treated skin, as it may cause skin erosions.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedure while using Adcin Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Adcin Gel.
As, the cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
What should I avoid while using Adcin Gel?
Adcin Gel makes skin sensitive, so you should avoid spending time in sunlight.
If you have to be in sunlight, you should wear sunscreen and wear a hat and clothes that cover the areas treated with Adcin Gel.
You should avoid weather extremes such as wind and cold, as this may irritate your skin.
Some skin products, such as harsh soaps, astringents, cosmetics that have strong skin-drying effects, should be avoided.
In addition, products containing high levels of alcohol should be avoided, as they may further dry or irritate your skin.
=

Is Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD a sleeping pill?
Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD belongs to a class of medicines called benzodiazepines and is used to treat anxiety, stop seizures (fits) or relax tense muscles.
This can also help relieve difficulty sleeping (insomnia), and is usually prescribed for a short period of time, if used to treat sleeping problems.
You should take it in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Does Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD cause sleepiness? If yes, then should I stop driving while taking Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD?
Yes, Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD causes drowsiness very commonly.
It also causes forgetfulness and affects muscular function which may adversely affect your ability to drive.
Sometimes, drowsiness persists even on the following day.
So, in case Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD makes you sleepy and affects your alertness, you should avoid driving.
For how long should I take Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD?
The duration of treatment with Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD is mainly as short as possible.
Your doctor will evaluate you after 4 weeks of treatment in order to assess the need for continuation of treatment, especially if you do not have any symptoms.
Before taking you off this medicine, your doctor may gradually decrease your dose to prevent any withdrawal side effects.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
Is it safe to take Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD and alcohol together?
No, it is not at all recommended to take alcohol with Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD since it can cause breathing problems, sleepiness and heart problems.
Taking Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD with alcohol may make you sleepy and your breathing may become so shallow that you may not wake up.
This may even lead to death.
Is Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD addictive?
People taking Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD in high doses or for a long term may become addicted to it.
Also, people with a history of alcoholism and drug abuse are more likely to become addicted to Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD.
Therefore, Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD should be taken for the shortest possible time and in the lowest effective dose.
Can I stop taking Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD if I start feeling better?
No, do not stop taking Adcloz 0.5mg Tablet MD suddenly as you may experience withdrawal effects like depression, nervousness, difficulty in sleeping, irritability, sweating, upset stomach or diarrhea.
Stopping it suddenly may even bring back the symptoms and make them harder to treat.
You may also experience mood changes, anxiety, restlessness and changes in sleep patterns.
These effects may occur even after taking low doses for a short period of time.
=

When should I take AD Colic 150mg Tablet?
The suitable timing of taking this medicine might differ depending upon your condition.
Your doctor might instruct you to take 2 to 3 doses per day and suggest to take the last dose at bedtime.
AD Colic 150mg Tablet should be taken with water milk and can be taken with food or after food.
When prescribed for dissolving gallstones, it is usually suggested to be taken once daily at night.
Ideally, it should be taken at a gap of 6 hours, for example at 8 am, 2 pm and 8 pm.
Is AD Colic 150mg Tablet safe?
AD Colic 150mg Tablet is usually considered to be a safe and effective medicine.
However, this medicine may have some common side effects, such as diarrhea.
If diarrhea occurs, your doctor may reduce the dose and if it persists, your treatment may be discontinued.
Additionally, using this medicine as a long-term therapy may also affect your liver enzyme levels.
To keep a check on this, your doctor will keep monitoring your liver enzyme levels regularly.
Despite these minor side effects, this medicine is supposed to be a good alternative to surgery in some patients with gallstones.
How does AD Colic 150mg Tablet help the liver?
AD Colic 150mg Tablet acts on the liver and gets concentrated in the bile secreted from the liver.
This, as a result, suppresses the synthesis and secretion of cholesterol by the liver, thereby decreasing the cholesterol levels in bile.
This medicine also acts by stopping the intestines from absorbing the bile salts and cholesterol.
So, the reduced cholesterol saturation in the bile from the liver leads to the gradual dissolving of cholesterol from gallstones, leading to a decrease in size and their eventual dissolution.
It also reduces elevated liver enzyme levels by increasing the bile flow through the liver, hence protecting the liver cells.
Does AD Colic 150mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, there is a chance of weight gain with AD Colic 150mg Tablet, but it is not common.
The use of AD Colic 150mg Tablet can cause weight gain when prescribed in patients with liver disease associated with chronic stasis of bile in small bile ducts of the liver.
In such condition, bile cannot flow from the liver to the small intestine.
Again, the chance of weight gain varies from person to person depending upon the disease, so consult your doctor if you experience weight gain.
What should I avoid while taking AD Colic 150mg Tablet?
While taking AD Colic 150mg Tablet, avoid taking an antacid preparation without consulting your doctor, as they decrease the effectiveness of AD Colic 150mg Tablet.
You should also avoid medicines like cholestyramine or colestipol as they affect the effectiveness of AD Colic 150mg Tablet.
So, ask your doctor about the time gap that should be maintained between AD Colic 150mg Tablet and these medicines.
Also, avoid taking oral contraceptives, estrogenic hormones and blood cholesterol-lowering agents such as clofibrate as they may increase the chances of developing gallstones and act opposite to the AD Colic 150mg Tablet.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of AD-Cough Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take AD-Cough Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using AD-Cough Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of AD-Cough Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

Yes, Adcyclo Tablet can cause infertility in both men and women.
It may interfere with the normal menstrual cycle in women and may stop sperm production in men.
If you are considering becoming parents after the treatment please discuss this with your doctor.
Talk to your doctor about cryopreservation (freezing) of sperm or eggs prior to treatment because of the possibility of irreversible infertility due to therapy with Adcyclo Tablet.
Do I need to avoid sun exposure during treatment with Adcyclo Tablet?
No, there is no evidence that you need to avoid sun exposure while on Adcyclo Tablet.
Skin and nail discoloration are reported rarely with Adcyclo Tablet.
Cancer medicines and radiation therapy can increase the risk of developing other cancers.
These may not develop soon and may take a number of years after the completion of your treatment.
The risk of developing cancer with Adcyclo Tablet is high in the urinary bladder.
Other rare cancers that may occur with use of Adcyclo Tablet include Acute leukemia, Myelodysplastic syndrome, and cancer of the ureters.
Yes, Adcyclo Tablet is a chemotherapy medicine, it belongs to the class of alkylating agents.
It works by killing cancer cells.
It is also known as cytotoxic medicine.
Can Adcyclo Tablet be used for non-cancer condition?
Yes, Adcyclo Tablet can be used to treat nephrotic syndrome (a disease that is caused by damage to the kidneys) in children whose disease has not improved, has gotten worse, or has come back after taking other medications.
Along with that, it can be used in children who experienced intolerable side effects with other medications.
However, in adults, the safety and effectiveness of Adcyclo Tablet for nephrotic syndrome has not been established.
=

Addcet-M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Addcet-M Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Addcet-M Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Addcet-M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Addcet-M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Addcet-M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Addcet-M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Addcet-M Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Addcet-M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Addcet-M Tablet.
Will Addcet-M Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Addcet-M Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Addex 500mg Ointment and what is it used for?
Addex 500mg Ointment is a dual-action wound management product that is used for the treatment of leg and diabetic ulcers.
It has antimicrobial properties that prevent infection at the site and promotes healing.
Are there any serious side-effects of using Addex 500mg Ointment?
Patients treated with Addex 500mg Ointment may experience slight pain within the first hour after application.
Minor reddening or swelling around the wound may occur without necessarily being an allergic reaction.
Although this is temporary, contact your doctor immediately if it does not subside.
How long should I use Addex 500mg Ointment?
Ideally, this medicine should not be used for longer than 3 months without checking with your doctor.
This varies from patient to patient and their condition.
What happens if I miss a dose of Addex 500mg Ointment?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember.
Skip the missed dose if it is almost time for your next scheduled dose.
Do not apply extra medicine to make up for the missed dose.
Discuss this with your healthcare provider.
In order to avoid missing a dose, use a calendar, pillbox, alarm clock, or cell phone alert to help you remember to use your medication.
You may also ask a family member a friend to remind you or check in with you to be sure you are using your medication.
Can Addex 500mg Ointment be used in children?
No, this medicine should not be used in children under 12 years of age.
=

What is Addira 4 Capsule used for?
Addira 4 Capsule is a medicine given for the treatment of difficulty in urination, urinary dribbling, a strong urge to urination, and frequent urination during the night.
It is also used to relieve other symptoms associated with benign enlargement of the prostate gland.
It works by reducing the tension in the muscles of the urinary tract like the prostate gland and urethra.
It facilitates an easier flow of urine through the urethra, and hence, is very useful in men with difficulty of urination.
When should I take Addira 4 Capsule?
It is usually advised to take the dose of Addira 4 Capsule daily with a meal.
Prefer taking it at the same time of the day.
In patients with any kidney impairment, the dose is reduced by the doctor.
Patients who are unable to swallow the capsules can open the capsule and sprinkle the powder on a tablespoon of apple sauce.
Consume this mixture immediately within 5 minutes without chewing and drink a glass of cool water immediately afterwards.
Can I undergo cataract surgery while taking Addira 4 Capsule?
In some cases, Addira 4 Capsule has shown specific side effect on the eyes.
It has been observed that during an eye surgery the iris tends to get floppy and pupil size becomes small in patients taking Addira 4 Capsule.
This makes the operation difficult and tedious.
Hence, you should always inform your eye specialist about any history related to the use of Addira 4 Capsule.
Also, the doctor should be informed about all the medication that you are on before starting the treatment.
Can Addira 4 Capsule cause erectile dysfunction?
Addira 4 Capsule usually does not affect erectile function.
However, Addira 4 Capsule may cause other sexual problems like ejaculatory dysfunction and failure to ejaculate.
If you experience any side effects or uneasiness while taking this medication, contact your doctor immediately.
Does Addira 4 Capsule lower blood pressure?
Yes, Addira 4 Capsule may cause a drop in blood pressure.
This most commonly occurs while taking the first dose of this medicine.
Hence, you should be cautious while driving, operating any machinery, or doing any important work during the initial days of treatment.
Consult your doctor before you start taking this medication.
Can I take sildenafil while taking Addira 4 Capsule?
You must consult your doctor before you start taking these medications.
Addira 4 Capsule can sometimes cause low blood pressure and fainting.
Taking sildenafil along with Addira 4 Capsule can further deteriorate the condition.
It could also lead to increased chances of drop in blood pressure in a few sensitive patients.
As a result, there could be increase in chances of fainting which could be dangerous.
=

What if I give too much of Addox 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Addox 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Addox 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Addox 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Addox 50mg Dry Syrup?
Addox 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Addox 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Addox 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Addox 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
=

I have been diagnosed with heart failure and the doctor has prescribed me Addpril 2.5 Tablet.
Addpril 2.5 Tablet belongs to the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor group of drugs.
It relaxes and widens the blood vessels, making it easier for the blood to pass through the vessels.
As a result of this, the heart does not have to work more to push the blood.
Since the workload on the heart is reduced, it is beneficial in heart failure.
Additionally, it is also used to lower blood pressure and prevent stroke.
Can Addpril 2.5 Tablet increase potassium levels? If yes, what should be done?
Addpril 2.5 Tablet may increase potassium levels in the blood, especially if you have uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, kidney problems, and dehydration.
Potassium levels may also increase in patients using potassium salts or medicines which increase potassium levels or are aged more than 70 years of age.
If you have any of these conditions and are using Addpril 2.5 Tablet, you need to be careful and get regular blood tests done to monitor potassium levels.
When can I expect my blood pressure to be normal after starting Addpril 2.5 Tablet?
Addpril 2.5 Tablet takes a few hours to reduce high blood pressure but since there are no symptoms, you will not notice any difference.
It takes a few weeks for the blood pressure to get fully controlled.
Do not stop taking the medicine.
Keep taking it even if you feel better or if your blood pressure is normalized.
Ever since I started taking Addpril 2.5 Tablet, I noticed that I have developed a dry cough which is very irritating and is not relieved by any medicine.
Addpril 2.5 Tablet commonly is responsible for dry cough which can be persistent and is not relieved by any medicine.
Talk to your doctor if it bothers you or you have trouble sleeping, as another medicine may be better.
Even if you stop taking Addpril 2.5 Tablet, the cough may take a few days to a month to go away.
I accidentally took a 25 mg Addpril 2.5 Tablet tablet instead of one 5 mg.
Will it have any harmful effects?
Yes, you may feel lightheaded, dizzy, your pulse may become slow and you may even faint.
You should take the help of a relative or friend for an emergency or seek immediate medical support.
=

Addtim Injection is a supplement of thiamine.
Thiamine is also known as Vitamin B1.
The medicine is used in the treatment of low levels of thiamine in the body.
It protects the body from conditions which are caused due to low levels of thiamine such as heart, brain and nerve disorders.
This vitamin is needed to process carbohydrates, fat and protein in the body.
Our body requires vitamin B1 to form the fuel the body runs on i.e., adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Addtim Injection provides the necessary dose of vitamin B1 which is used by nerve cells in order to function normally.
Who all are more likely to have deficiency of Addtim Injection?
The levels of vitamin B1 in our body decline with age, irrespective of medical condition.
Deficiency is most commonly found in alcoholics, people with malabsorption conditions, and those eating a very poor diet.
It is also common in children with congenital heart disease.
Individuals undergoing regular kidney dialysis may develop severe vitamin B1 deficiency, which can result in potentially fatal complications.
So, it is advisable that persons receiving dialysis should discuss the need for Addtim Injection with their physician.
Addtim Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Addtim Injection.
Does Addtim Injection cause weight gain?
No, Addtim Injection does not cause weight gain.
Some studies suggest that excessive deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause weight loss along with some other problems such as emotional disturbances, weakness or pain in the hands and legs etc.
If you are facing weight-related issues, consult your doctor.
Is Addtim Injection good for diabetics?
Yes, Addtim Injection has been proven to be beneficial for diabetic patients.
Addtim Injection has also shown positive effects on issues caused by poor blood sugar control.
However, it would be best to consult your doctor before using Addtim Injection.
=

Can the use of Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT doesn't work?
Talk to your doctor if Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT doesn't seem to work for you.
Your doctor may increase the dose of Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT or switch you to an alternate option, which may work for you.
What if I don't get better after using Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Is Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT good for urinary tract infection?
Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT is a relatively safe and effective antibiotic that is available for the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI).
Is Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT safe?
Adedrosel 250mg Tablet DT is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
=

Adehep 400 Tablet is a natural substance found in cells, tissue, and body fluids.
It is produced from methionine, an amino acid containing sulfur, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
The nutritional supplement is harvested from yeast (fungus) cell cultures.
What is Adehep 400 Tablet used for?
Adehep 400 Tablet has been studied extensively for depression, osteoarthritis, and depression.
But, there is no conclusive evidence that it is helpful in these conditions.
Who should not use Adehep 400 Tablet?
Patients with bipolar disorder (an illness characterized by mood swings, from depression to mania) should not be given Adehep 400 Tablet for depression as it can worsen symptoms of mania.
Also, consult your doctor if you are pregnant or nursing mother, have Parkinson’s disease or if you are HIV-positive.
What are the side effects of Adehep 400 Tablet?
The side effects of Adehep 400 Tablet are usually not very serious.
These side effects include headache, nausea, and diarrhea.
However, these effects are not very common.
Is Adehep 400 Tablet safe to use for long term?
Information on long term safety of Adehep 400 Tablet is limited.
There is one study in which patients took it for 2 years and no serious side effects were reported.
=

How long should I take Adencef 200mg Tablet?
Adencef 200mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Adencef 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Adencef 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adencef 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Adencef 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Adencef 200mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Adencef 200mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Adencef 200mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Adencef 200mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Adencef 200mg Tablet safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Adencef 200mg Tablet is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
=

How long does it take for Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution to work?
It takes about 2-3 days to see the benefits of the treatment.
Talk to your doctor if you feel constipated even after 3 days of taking Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution.
What is Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution used for?
Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution is used to treat constipation which is presented as infrequent bowel movements, hard and dry stools.
It is also used in patients with hepatic encephalopathy which is a serious liver problem causing confusion, tremors and decreased level of consciousness.
Is Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution a laxative?
Yes, Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution is a laxative which softens the stools by pulling in water from the body to the large intestine.
It is also used to reduce the amount of ammonia in the blood of patients with liver disease.
What are the side effects of taking Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution?
Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution very commonly causes diarrhea, flatulence, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain.
Diarrhea and abdominal pain occur due to a high dose.
In such cases, the dose should be reduced.
Flatulence may occur during the first few days of treatment and may disappear after sometime.
This medicine may also cause electrolyte imbalance.
However, this is an uncommon side effect.
Is it okay to take Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution every day?
You should take Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution for as long as advised by your doctor.
You may also take it for as long as constipation lasts, which may be up to a week.
For hepatic encephalopathy, the treatment may be longer, even several months.
Who should not be given Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution?
Aden Loose UP 10gm Oral Solution should not be given to patients who are allergic to it or are intolerant to lactose (cannot process lactose).
It should also be avoided in patients having galactosemia, a rare health problem where the body cannot process galactose.
=

Does Adenoject 3mg Injection lower blood pressure?
Yes, studies have shown that administration of Adenoject 3mg Injection decreases blood pressure or causes hypotension.
Therefore, it is advisable to inform your doctor if you already have low blood pressure.
What vitals do I need to monitor while taking Adenoject 3mg Injection?
Your doctor will advise you to monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing and oxygen levels closely while taking this medicine.
What kind of food should be avoided immediately after taking Adenoject 3mg Injection?
Food and drinks containing caffeine such as tea, coffee, chocolate and cola should be avoided for at least 12 hours before you are given Adenoject 3mg Injection.
How is Adenoject 3mg Injection administered? Why is it given rapidly?
Adenoject 3mg Injection will be given to you by a doctor or nurse as an injection in a hospital setting.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adentin LB 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Adeone S Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Adeone S Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Adeone S Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adeone S Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Adeone S Injection takes to work?
Usually, Adeone S Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Adeone S Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Adeone S Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adeone S Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

How long does it take for Aderta 50mg Tablet to work?
You may start noticing an improvement in symptoms within 7 days of taking Aderta 50mg Tablet.
However, it may take longer to show full response and will vary from person to person.
How long do I need to take Aderta 50mg Tablet?
You should continue taking Aderta 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor recommends to take it which may be for several months.
Doctors usually recommend the medicine for 6 months to a year after you no longer feel depressed.
It is important to know that stopping the medication before the suggested time may cause depression to come back.
When is the best time to take Aderta 50mg Tablet?
Aderta 50mg Tablet is usually taken once a day and can be taken at any time of the day.
It can be taken with or without food.
Take it as per your convenience but preferably at the same time each day.
Some people who have sleep difficulty after taking Aderta 50mg Tablet, they should take it in the morning.
Whereas, some take it at night to limit the side effects of nausea and vomiting.
Does Aderta 50mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Aderta 50mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness.
In case you feel dizzy, sleepy or tired after taking Aderta 50mg Tablet, you should avoid driving or using heavy machinery.
This generally happens within the first few days and weeks after starting Aderta 50mg Tablet, which may disappear after 2-3 months of use of Aderta 50mg Tablet.
What does Aderta 50mg Tablet do for anxiety?
Aderta 50mg Tablet belongs to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of medicines.
It increases the levels of serotonin which is an important chemical and a neurotransmitter.
This increase in serotonin levels can help to improve and regulate your mood, resulting in an improvement in the symptoms of anxiety.
Can I stop taking Aderta 50mg Tablet if I am better now?
No, you should not stop taking Aderta 50mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
This is because sudden discontinuation of Aderta 50mg Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms.
Hence, it is important to gradually reduce the dose with time (over several weeks or months).
=

Adexone 1gm Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Adexone 1gm Injection take to work?
Usually, Adexone 1gm Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Adexone 1gm Injection?
Adexone 1gm Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Adexone 1gm Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Adexone 1gm Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Adexone 1gm Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Adexone 1gm Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Adexone 1gm Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Adexone 1gm Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Adexone 1gm Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Adexone 1gm Injection administered?
Adexone 1gm Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Adexone 1gm Injection.
=

Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Amitriptyline.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
This medicine calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
Can I stop taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you stop taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet suddenly, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet?
The use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat foods that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will also help prevent weight gain.
If you keep good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet affect my sex life?
The use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Different sexual problems can occur due to Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet like decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain an erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort during intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss with your doctor.
Do not stop taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet.
Can the use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet change the color of urine?
Yes, Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet can the change the color of the urine to blue or green color.
This change in color is expected while using Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet, and it is not harmful.
Your urine color becomes normal once you stop taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet?
Serious side effects with Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice changes in body temperature, difficulty in breathing, increased heartbeat (palpitations), weakness, unsteadiness when walking, reduced coordination or slowed reactions, unusual changes in mood or behavior such as restlessness, nervousness or excitement, signs of depression, seeing or hearing things that are not there, irrational thinking, blurred or double vision, uncontrollable jerky eye movements, difficulty seeing, signs of frequent infections such as fever, severe chills, sore throat or mouth ulcers.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and may need urgent medical attention.
How long will Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet take to act?
An initial benefit of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months to see the full benefit.
It may even take longer in some patients.
What if I forget to take Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect.
If you are not sure what to do, ask your doctor about taking Adgaba-AT 100 Tablet.
=

What is the dosage of Adglim 1mg Tablet?
The recommended starting dose of Adglim 1mg Tablet is 1 mg or 2 mg once daily, administered with breakfast.
If you are at a higher risk of low blood sugar (e.g., the elderly or patients with renal impairment), you will be given a starting dose of 1 mg once daily.
The usual maintenance dose is 1–4 mg once daily.
The maximum recommended dose is 8 mg once daily.
After reaching a daily dose of 2 mg, the dosage will be increased not more than 2 mg at 1- to 2-week intervals, based on your blood glucose level.
Does Adglim 1mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Adglim 1mg Tablet itself does not cause sleepiness.
However, it may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when used with other anti-diabetes medicine.
Because of this you may feel sleepy or have problems in sleeping.
Is Adglim 1mg Tablet safe for kidneys?
Adglim 1mg Tablet does not affect kidneys in patients with normal kidney function.
However, its use should be avoided in patients with severe kidney disease since Adglim 1mg Tablet is principally eliminated by the kidneys.
Does Adglim 1mg Tablet cause memory loss?
No, it is not known that Adglim 1mg Tablet causes memory loss.
However, the use of Adglim 1mg Tablet may cause low blood sugar which may cause problems with concentration and reduced alertness.
Who should not take Adglim 1mg Tablet?
Adglim 1mg Tablet should be avoided by patients who are allergic to it, have severe kidney or liver disease, have G6PD-deficiency (an inherited condition affecting red blood cells) or are due to have surgery.
Additionally, patients who are trying to get pregnant, are pregnant or breastfeeding, or have insulin-dependent diabetes (type 1 diabetes mellitus) should avoid taking Adglim 1mg Tablet.
How long does it take for Adglim 1mg Tablet to start working?
Adglim 1mg Tablet takes about 2 to 3 hours to reduce blood sugar levels.
You may not feel any difference, but this does not mean the medicine is not working.
Continue taking the medication as directed by your doctor and if you have any concerns, discuss it with your doctor.
How long do I need to take Adglim 1mg Tablet? Can I stop the medication?
Usually, the treatment for diabetes is suggested for a long term.
You may have to continue the treatment life long.
Adglim 1mg Tablet only controls the sugar levels but does not cure it.
Do not stop taking Adglim 1mg Tablet without talking to your doctor.
If you stop taking Adglim 1mg Tablet suddenly your diabetes may get worse.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet?
No, it is not safe to drink alcohol while using Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol may lower your blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
Also, it can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
What should I inform the doctor before taking Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet?
Before taking Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet inform your doctor if you have congestive heart failure, kidney problems, liver problems, swelling of the back of the eye.
Inform the doctor if you are pregnant, breastfeeding or a premenopausal woman.
Let the doctor know if you are taking any prescription and non-prescription medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements.
Can the use of Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet can cause vitamin B12 deficiency as it contains metformin in it.
On long-term use, it interferes with absorption of vitamin B12 in the stomach.
Can the use of Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your meal, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always carry some sugary item like a candy or chocolate with you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adglim MP LS 2mg/500mg/7.5mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Adheal Plus Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Trypsin, Bromelain, Rutoside and Diclofenac.
This medication helps in relieving pain and swelling (inflammation).
It works by lowering the levels of those chemical substances in the body which cause pain and swelling (inflammation).
Can the use of Adheal Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Adheal Plus Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Adheal Plus Tablet?
The use of Adheal Plus Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers (NSAIDs) or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Adheal Plus Tablet can increase the risk of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain and swelling which is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Adheal Plus Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can Adheal Plus Tablet be stopped when my pain and swelling (inflammation) are relieved?
Adheal Plus Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when pain and swelling are relieved.
However, Adheal Plus Tablet should be continued if the doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Adheal Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Adheal Plus Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
=

Adicef 1000mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Adicef 1000mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Adicef 1000mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Adicef 1000mg Injection?
Adicef 1000mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Adicef 1000mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Adicef 1000mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Adicef 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Adicef 1000mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Adicef 1000mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Adicef 1000mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Adicef 1000mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Adicef 1000mg Injection administered?
Adicef 1000mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Adicef 1000mg Injection.
=

Is Adicef O 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Adicef O 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Adicef O 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adicef O 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Adicef O 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Adicef O 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Adicef O 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Adicef O 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Adicef O 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Adicef O 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adicef O 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Adicef O 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Adicef O 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
=

Can Adicin 250mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Adicin 250mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Adicin 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adicin 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Adicin 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Adicin 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Adicin 250mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Adicin 250mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Adicin 250mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Adicin 250mg Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adicoff Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take Adicoff Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using Adicoff Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Adicoff Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

What are the storage condition for Adidase-SP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Adidase-SP Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Adidase-SP Tablet?
Yes, Adidase-SP Tablet is safe for most of the patients, however, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Adidase-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Adidase-SP Tablet is usually used for a short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Adidase-SP Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your physician to do so.
Can the use of Adidase-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Adidase-SP Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Adidase-SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of $ame can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Adidase-SP Tablet?
The use of Adidase-SP Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

How to take Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet?
Take this medication by mouth, with or without food as directed by your doctor, usually once a day.
If you are consuming chewable tablets, chew thoroughly and then swallow.
Complete the full course of this medicine, even if symptoms disappear after a few days.
Is the use of Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet contraindicated in patients with impaired renal function?
Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet should be used with particular care in patients with severely impaired renal function.
Dose modification is advised for patients with moderate or severe renal impairment.
What are the precautions that need to be taken while taking Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet?
The dose of Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet should be adjusted in patients with impairment of kidneys and for those who have gastrointestinal disease or colitis.
What are the serious side effects associated with the use of Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Adifixim CV 200mg/125mg Tablet can also lead to serious side effects like severe stomach/abdominal pain, persistent nausea/vomiting, unusual tiredness, new signs of infection (e.g., persistent sore throat, fever), yellowing of eyes/skin, dark urine, easy bruising/bleeding, signs of kidney problems (such as change in the amount of urine) and mental/mood changes (such as confusion).
What all should I tell my doctor before starting the course of this medicine?
Please inform your doctor if you are pregnant or trying for a baby or breastfeeding before you start taking this medicine.
Let your doctor know if you are using any other medicine.
=

Can the use of Adiflox 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adiflox 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Adiflox 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adiflox 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Adiflox 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Adiflox 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Adiflox 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Adilan 40mg Tablet SR and what is it used for?
Adilan 40mg Tablet SR belongs to the group of medicines called vasodilators and uterine relaxants.
It is used in the treatment of premature labor, a condition when the uterus starts contracting too early than usual.
It may also be used in the treatment of peripheral vascular diseases.
How and in what dose should I take Adilan 40mg Tablet SR?
Take this medicine, as per the advice of your doctor.
The dose and duration depend on your exact medical condition.
However take it at the same time of each day, to help you remember it.
What precautions do I need to take while taking Adilan 40mg Tablet SR?
You should consult your doctor, immediately if your contractions begin again or your water breaks.
 What are the possible side effects of using Adilan 40mg Tablet SR?
The common side effects of Adilan 40mg Tablet SR are trembling, nervousness, weakness, dizziness, flushing, tachycardia, chest pain, nausea, and vomiting.
=

How long does ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE takes to work?
Usually, ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE used for?
ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin.
It is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Which medicines should be avoided while taking ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE?
ADILOX 250MG/250MG CAPSULE should be avoided with methotrexate which is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancer.
=

Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Adimox 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is Adinep 10mg Tablet habit forming?
Yes, Adinep 10mg Tablet can be habit forming if used for a long time.
The risk of dependence increases with dose and duration of treatment; it is also greater in patients with a history of alcohol or drug abuse.
Therefore, the duration of treatment is generally as short as possible.
Can Adinep 10mg Tablet make me sleepy?
Yes, Adinep 10mg Tablet can make you sleepy.
It usually begins within the first month of treatment and may diminish with continued treatment.
How long does Adinep 10mg Tablet take to work?
Adinep 10mg Tablet is a fast-acting medicine, which means that it quickly gets absorbed from the bloodstream.
Adinep 10mg Tablet reaches its highest blood levels within half an hour to 4 hours after the dose is taken.
Is Adinep 10mg Tablet the same as clonazepam?
No, Adinep 10mg Tablet and clonazepam are not the same medicines but belong to the same class of drugs known as benzodiazepines.
How long does Adinep 10mg Tablet withdrawal last?
Withdrawal syndrome may develop at any time up to 3 weeks after stopping Adinep 10mg Tablet.
Withdrawal signs may last anywhere from 4 weeks to a year or more.
Can I stop taking Adinep 10mg Tablet?
No, do not stop taking Adinep 10mg Tablet even if you are feeling well, unless your doctor tells you to.
Suddenly stopping Adinep 10mg Tablet may cause unwanted effects known as withdrawal symptoms.
To prevent this, the dose of clobazam needs to be reduced gradually before completely stopping it.
Therefore, it is important that you consult your doctor first.
=

What is Adipe 25mg Tablet used for?
Adipe 25mg Tablet is a medicine used to treat anxiety disorder and depression that is unresponsive to other alternative medicines.
It is also used to relieve nerve pain and fibromyalgia.
Adipe 25mg Tablet should be taken only if prescribed by a doctor, exactly as directed.
Is Adipe 25mg Tablet a muscle relaxant?
Adipe 25mg Tablet is not a muscle relaxant.
It is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) used in the treatment of depression, nerve pain, and anxiety disorder.
What is the difference between Adipe 25mg Tablet and amitriptyline?
Adipe 25mg Tablet is chemically related to Amitriptyline and both are tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) medicine.
There is overlap in pharmacological property of this medicine.
Is Adipe 25mg Tablet the same as doxepin?
Adipe 25mg Tablet and doxepin are different medicines but belong to the similar chemical class.
Doxepin, at low doses, can improve sleep in patients with insomnia.
It is also available in the topical form for use in various neuro-dermatitis syndrome, especially itching.
How to stop Adipe 25mg Tablet?
If your doctor asks you to stop Adipe 25mg Tablet, you should reduce the dose slowly over 4 weeks.
You should not discontinue it abruptly.
Sudden discontinuation may cause aggression, anxiety, blurred vision, concentration impairment, constipation and crying spell.
Adipe 25mg Tablet can be fatal (can cause death) in overdose.
This is due to a life-threatening or dangerous side effect in overdose like hyperthermia, seizure, arrhythmia, tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension or sudden death.
That's why it is generally not considered a first-line option for depression because of side effect profile.
Can I take Adipe 25mg Tablet with diazepam?
It is better to avoid this combination.
Diazepam is a sedative drug and Adipe 25mg Tablet may cause sedation as a side effect too.
Taking both of them together can increase the drowsiness or sleepiness.
Inform your doctor if you are taking diazepam.
Can Adipe 25mg Tablet be used in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia?
Adipe 25mg Tablet is not approved for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia.
Trigeminal neuralgia is a chronic pain condition that affects the trigeminal or 5th cranial nerve, one of the most widely distributed nerves in the head.
Can Adipe 25mg Tablet be used in the treatment of burning mouth syndrome?
Adipe 25mg Tablet is not approved for the treatment of burning mouth syndrome.
Burning mouth syndrome is a painful condition of mouth that is burning, scalding, tingling or feeling of numbness that may occur every day for months or longer.
=

Is Adipod 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Adipod 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Adipod 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adipod 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Adipod 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Adipod 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Adipod 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Adipod 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Adipod 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Adipod 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adipod 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Adipod 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Adipod 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
=

What is Adiproz 40 Tablet used for?
Adiproz 40 Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Adiproz 40 Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Adiproz 40 Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Adiproz 40 Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Adiproz 40 Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Adiproz 40 Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Adiproz 40 Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Adiproz 40 Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Adiproz 40 Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Adiproz 40 Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Adiproz 40 Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Adiproz 40 Tablet for a long term?
Adiproz 40 Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Adiproz 40 Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Adiproz 40 Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Adiproz 40 Tablet?
=

How long does it take for Adisert 100 Tablet to work?
You may start noticing an improvement in symptoms within 7 days of taking Adisert 100 Tablet.
However, it may take longer to show full response and will vary from person to person.
How long do I need to take Adisert 100 Tablet?
You should continue taking Adisert 100 Tablet as long as your doctor recommends to take it which may be for several months.
Doctors usually recommend the medicine for 6 months to a year after you no longer feel depressed.
It is important to know that stopping the medication before the suggested time may cause depression to come back.
When is the best time to take Adisert 100 Tablet?
Adisert 100 Tablet is usually taken once a day and can be taken at any time of the day.
It can be taken with or without food.
Take it as per your convenience but preferably at the same time each day.
Some people who have sleep difficulty after taking Adisert 100 Tablet, they should take it in the morning.
Whereas, some take it at night to limit the side effects of nausea and vomiting.
Does Adisert 100 Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Adisert 100 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness.
In case you feel dizzy, sleepy or tired after taking Adisert 100 Tablet, you should avoid driving or using heavy machinery.
This generally happens within the first few days and weeks after starting Adisert 100 Tablet, which may disappear after 2-3 months of use of Adisert 100 Tablet.
What does Adisert 100 Tablet do for anxiety?
Adisert 100 Tablet belongs to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of medicines.
It increases the levels of serotonin which is an important chemical and a neurotransmitter.
This increase in serotonin levels can help to improve and regulate your mood, resulting in an improvement in the symptoms of anxiety.
=

Can I use Aditop C Gel as a spot treatment (for single pimple)?
It is not a spot treatment and should not be used to treat a single pimple.
Aditop C Gel should be applied to the entire face.
Using it everyday can treat your acne.
How long does Aditop C Gel take to work?
It may take up to 2-3 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Aditop C Gel may take some time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and let your doctor know if your symptoms do not improve or get worse.
Will Aditop C Gel be more effective if I overuse it?
No, do not overuse Aditop C Gel.
It can cause over-absorption of the medicine into the body and cause severe diarrhea.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What precautions I need to follow while using Aditop C Gel?
You need to be cautious while applying Aditop C Gel.
Avoid contact with the eyes, lips, angles of the nose, and inside of the mouth.
This medication should not be applied to cuts, abrasions, inflamed or reddened skin, and sunburned skin.
Wax epilation should not be performed on treated skin, as it may cause skin erosions.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedure while using Aditop C Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Aditop C Gel.
As, the cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
What should I avoid while using Aditop C Gel?
Aditop C Gel makes skin sensitive, so you should avoid spending time in sunlight.
If you have to be in sunlight, you should wear sunscreen and wear a hat and clothes that cover the areas treated with Aditop C Gel.
You should avoid weather extremes such as wind and cold, as this may irritate your skin.
Some skin products, such as harsh soaps, astringents, cosmetics that have strong skin-drying effects, should be avoided.
In addition, products containing high levels of alcohol should be avoided, as they may further dry or irritate your skin.
=

What precautions do I need to take while on Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet?
Follow all the instructions given by your doctor strictly.
Restrict water intake after taking Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet as drinking too much water can lead to fluid overload, which is a serious side effect.
Try not to swallow water while swimming.
How long do I need to give Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet to my child for bedwetting?
Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 3 months for bedwetting.
After 3 months, your doctor will stop the medicine for a week to assess whether your child still needs Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet or not.
Does Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet cure bed wetting?
No, Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet does not cure bedwetting, but it helps control bedwetting.
It works by replacing a hormone (vasopressin) that is normally produced in the body to help balance the amount of water and salt.
Does Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet make you gain weight?
No, Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet itself does not cause weight gain.
Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet may cause fluid overload which may in turn cause weight gain.
Fluid overload is a serious side effect and you should immediately contact your doctor if you experience headache, nausea, vomiting, restlessness, tiredness, loss of appetite, sleepiness, confusion and muscle cramps.
Is Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet a diuretic?
No, Adiuretin 0.2mg Tablet is not a diuretic.
It is a hormone which helps lower urine output in patients with diabetes insipidus and helps control bedwetting in children.
It works by reducing the amount of urine produced by the kidneys, thereby reducing the frequency of urination.
=

Is Adizen 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Adizen 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Adizen 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Adizen 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Adizen 5mg Tablet to work?
Adizen 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Adizen 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Adizen 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Adizen 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Adizen 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Adizen 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Adizen 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Adizen 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Adizen 5mg Tablet
=

Will Adlecof D Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I breastfeed while taking Adlecof D Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Adlecof D Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Adlecof D Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Adlecof D Syrup Hydrobromide may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Avoiding driving car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
=

What is Adlerab 20mg Injection used for?
Adlerab 20mg Injection is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Adlerab 20mg Injection also prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
Adlerab 20mg Injection is also helpful as a preanesthetic medication (medicine given just before anesthesia) to reduce the chances of aspiration related complications like lung injury.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Adlerab 20mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
It also helps to cut down on caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
Does Adlerab 20mg Injection cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Adlerab 20mg Injection can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Adlerab 20mg Injection decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Adlerab 20mg Injection?
You make see better results if you make certain dietary and lifestyle changes while taking Adlerab 20mg Injection.
You can consult your dietician to get a diet chart that suits you best.
Eat at least 3 hours before sleeping to reduce the chances of aggravation of your symptoms at night.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
Refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake and smoking should also be avoided as they may worsen your symptoms.
Can I take alcohol with Adlerab 20mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Adlerab 20mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Adlerab 20mg Injection, but it can increase acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with Adlerab 20mg Injection?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Adlerab 20mg Injection.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Adlerab 20mg Injection.
=

Does Admenta 5 Tablet have abuse potential?
No, Admenta 5 Tablet does not have abuse potential.
On the contrary, it may prevent excess use of addictive drugs such as morphine or ethanol.
When and how Admenta 5 Tablet should be taken?
Admenta 5 Tablet should be taken orally once a day.
To benefit from your medicine you should take it regularly every day at the same time of the day.
The tablets should be swallowed with some water.
The tablets can be taken with or without food.
How long does it take for Admenta 5 Tablet to start working?
For Admenta 5 Tablet to start working and show its full benefits, it may require between 3 and 8 hours.
The doctor may require a follow-up clinical assessment to check the progress after 4 weeks and then 6 months after the first assessment.
What are the symptoms of overdosage of Admenta 5 Tablet?
The symptoms which can be observed due to an overdose of Admenta 5 Tablet include tiredness, weakness, drowsiness, confusion, hallucinations, and/or vomiting.
Some may also experience diarrhea, vertigo, agitation, aggression, and walking difficulty.
How does Admenta 5 Tablet affect a person with dementia?
Admenta 5 Tablet belongs to a class of medications called N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists.
It works by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain.
Admenta 5 Tablet may improve the ability to think and remember.
It may also reduce the deterioration of these abilities in people who have Alzheimer's disease.
However, with time the effectiveness of this medicine will reduce and it may not be able to cure Alzheimer's disease or prevent the loss of these abilities.
Dementia is a syndrome in which there is deterioration in memory, thinking, behavior, and the ability to perform everyday activities.
Dementia is one of the major causes of disability and dependency among older people worldwide.
Alzheimer disease is the most common form of dementia which contributes to around 60 to 70% of cases.
Can I just stop taking Admenta 5 Tablet?
=

Is Admocort 6mg Tablet a steroid?
Yes, Admocort 6mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Admocort 6mg Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Admocort 6mg Tablet used for?
Admocort 6mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
How does Admocort 6mg Tablet work?
Admocort 6mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Admocort 6mg Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Admocort 6mg Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Admocort 6mg Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
Is Admocort 6mg Tablet a painkiller?
No, Admocort 6mg Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
=

How much Admol Drop Sweet Orange should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Admol Drop Sweet Orange?
Admol Drop Sweet Orange usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
My child vomited after taking Admol Drop Sweet Orange.
Admol Drop Sweet Orange usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
Can I give Admol Drop Sweet Orange to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Admol Drop Sweet Orange.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Admol Drop Sweet Orange is considered as an overdose?
You should only take four doses of Admol Drop Sweet Orange in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
=

What is Admopan 40mg Tablet used for?
Admopan 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Admopan 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Admopan 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Admopan 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Admopan 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Admopan 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Admopan 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Admopan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Admopan 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Admopan 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Admopan 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Admopan 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Admopan 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Admopan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Admopan 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
=

Which is the best time to take Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Take the Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is best to take one capsule daily on an empty stomach.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Use of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
Can the use of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Does the use of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR lead to increased risk of fractures?
Several studies in adults suggest that treatment with Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR may be associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis-related fractures of the hip, wrist or spine.
The risk of fracture was increased in patients who received high dose.
High dose can mean multiple daily doses, and long-term therapy (a year or longer).
Can I drive while taking Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
No, taking Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR may make you feel sleepy, dizzy or could affect your eyesight.
So do not drive or use machines until you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Admorab L 75mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Admoxy CV DS Syrup?
Admoxy CV DS Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Admoxy CV DS Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Admoxy CV DS Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Admoxy CV DS Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Admoxy CV DS Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Admoxy CV DS Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Admoxy CV DS Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Admoxy CV DS Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Is Adnexa 10mg Injection a vesicant (agent that causes tissue blistering and damage)?
Yes, Adnexa 10mg Injection is a vesicant; it may cause tissue blistering if it leaks out of the vein.
How effective is Adnexa 10mg Injection?
Adnexa 10mg Injection is effective in the treatment of various cancers including cancer of the breast, ovary, stomach, lung, bowel or rectum, malignant lymphomas (a type of blood cancer of infection-fighting cells of the blood) such as Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, leukemia (blood cancer), multiple myeloma (a type of blood cancer of infection-fighting cells of the blood).
It may be used in bladder cancers and to prevent reoccurrence of bladder cancer after surgery.
=

Adnip-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Adnip-P Tablet?
Adnip-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Adnip-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Adnip-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Adnip-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Adnip-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Adnip-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Adnip-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Adnip-P Tablet?
The use of Adnip-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Adnip-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Adnip-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Adnip-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Adnomox 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is it safe to use Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet?
Yes, Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet?
The use of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
What is the recommended storage condition for Ado 10mg/20mg Tablet?
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Adocet M Oral Suspension by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Adocet M Oral Suspension be stored?
Adocet M Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Adocet M Oral Suspension make my child sleepy?
Adocet M Oral Suspension causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Adocet M Oral Suspension?
No, don’t start Adocet M Oral Suspension without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Adocet M Oral Suspension can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
Can I stop the medicine by myself?
No, all symptoms may reappear on sudden withdrawal of Adocet M Oral Suspension usually if taken for a long-term.
It is advised to stop this medicine gradually under the guidance of your child’s doctor.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Adof 200mg Tablet as soon you as remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can I stop taking Adof 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adof 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Is it safe to use Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
Yes, Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
The use of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
What is the recommended storage condition for Adoloc D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Adorant 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Does Adova Capsule cause weight gain?
Yes, Adova Capsule may cause weight gain, but it is not very common.
There could be other reasons as well which can lead to weight gain such as menopause.
However, if you gain weight while taking Adova Capsule, take low-calorie diet and exercise regularly.
Consult your doctor or a nutritionist to help you lose weight.
Does Adova Capsule cause hair loss?
Yes, Adova Capsule commonly affects the hair by making them thin which further leads to hair loss.
However, it does not occur in everyone.
Hair thinning probably occurs due to estrogen lowering effect of Adova Capsule.
These effects are not permanent and may revert after some time.
If it concerns you then talk to your doctor for another alternative medicine to avoid damage to hair.
Why do bodybuilders use Adova Capsule?
Bodybuilders who take anabolic steroids for bodybuilding take Adova Capsule to reduce the production of estrogen which is a side effect of anabolic steroids.
An increase in estrogen levels in bodybuilders may result in high pitched female voice, shrinking of the testicles or penis, and breast enlargement.
In order to avoid such characteristics bodybuilders take Adova Capsule.
Can Adova Capsule be taken at night?
Adova Capsule can be taken anytime of the day.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
You can take it with or without food.
Do not crush, break, or chew the tablet.
While on Adova Capsule how should patients be monitored?
While you are taking Adova Capsule your doctor will get blood tests done to check blood cell counts and investigate liver and kidney functions.
Along with that, the doctor may advise a bone scan if you are at risk for osteoporosis, which may also occur due to Adova Capsule treatment.
In what situations should I contact my doctor, while taking Adova Capsule?
You should contact your doctor if you experience any serious adverse reaction.
It is important to inform the doctor in case of prolonged or severe nausea or vomiting, extreme weakness, and extreme pain.
Along with that, consult your dotor if you have taken more than the recommended dose of Adova Capsule.
=

What if I give too much of Adoxim 50mg Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Adoxim 50mg Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Adoxim 50mg Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Adoxim 50mg Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Adoxim 50mg Syrup?
Adoxim 50mg Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Adoxim 50mg Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Adoxim 50mg Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Adoxim 50mg Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
My child is having a sore throat and ear infection.
More than 80% of sore throats and ear infections are caused by a virus and antibiotics are not given for viral infections.
If your child has a sore throat, runny nose, a barky cough, pain, and discharge from the ear, it is most likely because of a virus.
Consult your child’s doctor to seek guidance.
=

Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Yes, Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet?
The use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Adozot 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

What is Adpan 40mg Tablet used for?
Adpan 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Adpan 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Adpan 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Adpan 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Adpan 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Adpan 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Adpan 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Adpan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Adpan 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Adpan 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Adpan 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Adpan 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Adpan 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Adpan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Adpan 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Adpan 40mg Tablet?
=

How long does Adpime 1000mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Adpime 1000mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can the use of Adpime 1000mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adpime 1000mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Adpime 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

What if I give too much of Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup by mistake?
Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup is safe and usually an extra dose of it would not do any harm.
But since overdose increases the risk of side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition, you must speak to a doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup to your child.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup?
Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may keep a check on your child’s condition by prescribing kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically.
Can Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad ones too, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child develops diarrhea while on Adpoxime CV Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
=

Can Adracef-CV 500 Tablet be used to treat viral infections?
No, Adracef-CV 500 Tablet is only indicated to treat bacterial infections.
It does not treat viral infections such as common cold, flu.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Adracef-CV 500 Tablet?
The use of Adracef-CV 500 Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any constituents of this medicine.
Inform your doctor about your medical history before taking this medicine to avoid any side effects.
Can the use of Adracef-CV 500 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Adracef-CV 500 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Antibiotics can kill good, or helpful bacteria in your stomach and can cause diarrhea.
If you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent diarrhea.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting a doctor.
Can I stop taking Adracef-CV 500 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Adracef-CV 500 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adracef-CV 500 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is the dosage of Adride 4mg Tablet?
The recommended starting dose of Adride 4mg Tablet is 1 mg or 2 mg once daily, administered with breakfast.
If you are at a higher risk of low blood sugar (e.g., the elderly or patients with renal impairment), you will be given a starting dose of 1 mg once daily.
The usual maintenance dose is 1–4 mg once daily.
The maximum recommended dose is 8 mg once daily.
After reaching a daily dose of 2 mg, the dosage will be increased not more than 2 mg at 1- to 2-week intervals, based on your blood glucose level.
Does Adride 4mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Adride 4mg Tablet itself does not cause sleepiness.
However, it may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when used with other anti-diabetes medicine.
Because of this you may feel sleepy or have problems in sleeping.
Is Adride 4mg Tablet safe for kidneys?
Adride 4mg Tablet does not affect kidneys in patients with normal kidney function.
However, its use should be avoided in patients with severe kidney disease since Adride 4mg Tablet is principally eliminated by the kidneys.
Does Adride 4mg Tablet cause memory loss?
No, it is not known that Adride 4mg Tablet causes memory loss.
However, the use of Adride 4mg Tablet may cause low blood sugar which may cause problems with concentration and reduced alertness.
Who should not take Adride 4mg Tablet?
Adride 4mg Tablet should be avoided by patients who are allergic to it, have severe kidney or liver disease, have G6PD-deficiency (an inherited condition affecting red blood cells) or are due to have surgery.
Additionally, patients who are trying to get pregnant, are pregnant or breastfeeding, or have insulin-dependent diabetes (type 1 diabetes mellitus) should avoid taking Adride 4mg Tablet.
How long does it take for Adride 4mg Tablet to start working?
Adride 4mg Tablet takes about 2 to 3 hours to reduce blood sugar levels.
You may not feel any difference, but this does not mean the medicine is not working.
Continue taking the medication as directed by your doctor and if you have any concerns, discuss it with your doctor.
How long do I need to take Adride 4mg Tablet? Can I stop the medication?
Usually, the treatment for diabetes is suggested for a long term.
You may have to continue the treatment life long.
Adride 4mg Tablet only controls the sugar levels but does not cure it.
Do not stop taking Adride 4mg Tablet without talking to your doctor.
If you stop taking Adride 4mg Tablet suddenly your diabetes may get worse.
What can happen if I take more than the recommended dose of Adride 4mg Tablet?
Adride 4mg Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
Overdose of Adride 4mg Tablet may significantly decrease your blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
If you think you have taken an excess dose and experience a dip in your sugar level, consume enough sugar (e.g., a small bar of sugar cubes, sweet juice or sweetened tea) and inform a doctor immediately.
Severe cases of hypoglycemia accompanied by loss of consciousness and coma require immediate medical treatment and admission into hospital.
=

What are the warning symptoms that should prompt me to discontinue therapy?
You may develop several warning symptoms that would suggest that the treatment needs to be discontinued.
You may develop compulsive behavior such as gambling, increase in sex drive, compulsive shopping and eating.
You may notice that your symptoms are getting worse (start earlier than usual or are more intense, affect other parts of the body, such as the arms, and symptoms return early in morning).
If you notice these symptoms, consult your doctor immediately.
How long does Adrole 20mg Tablet XL take to work?
You may be able to see improvement within a week.
However, it may take longer and differs from individual to individual.
Can I stop taking Adrole 20mg Tablet XL if I do not see any improvement in my symptoms?
No, you should not stop taking Adrole 20mg Tablet XL on your own as you may experience anxiety, depression, lack of interest, tiredness, sweating and severe pain in the leg.
The dose should be reduced slowly.
In some patients, it may take longer to see improvement but not beyond 12 weeks.
Talk to your doctor if you want to stop it.
Can I take gabapentin and Adrole 20mg Tablet XL together?
Yes, you can take gabapentin and Adrole 20mg Tablet XL together.
However, be careful as taking these two medicines together may cause excessive drowsiness, dizziness and decrease your mental alertness.
So, you may have to avoid driving, operating machinery or working at heights while taking the two medicines together.
=

How should I take Adsunib 50 Capsule?
You should take Adsunib 50 Capsule exactly as directed by your doctor.
It should be started by doctors who have experience in administering cancer medicines.
Take it once a day with or without food.
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit during your treatment with Adsunib 50 Capsule, as the chances of side effects may be more.
Does Adsunib 50 Capsule have any effect on skin and hair?
During treatment with Adsunib 50 Capsule, your skin may get lighter and there may be hair loss.
Also, patient may experience dryness, thickness or cracking of the skin, blisters, or rashes on the palms and soles.
But, these side effects are reversible and go away once the medicine is stopped.
Adsunib 50 Capsule may also cause serious skin reactions such as severe rash or rapidly spreading skin ulceration which could be fatal.
Therefore, inform your doctor immediately if symptoms of infection occur around a skin injury.
Let your doctor know if you have fever, pain, redness, swelling, or drainage of pus or blood.
What is the most important thing I need to know about Adsunib 50 Capsule?
Adsunib 50 Capsule can cause serious side effects such as severe liver problems that can lead to death.
Therefore, tell your doctor right away if you experience itching, yellow eyes or skin, dark urine or pain or discomfort in the right upper stomach area.
Your doctor will get blood tests done to check your liver function before and during treatment with Adsunib 50 Capsule.
In case you develop liver problems, your doctor may stop the medicine temporarily or permanently.
Are generics available for Adsunib 50 Capsule? How does Adsunib 50 Capsule work?
There are no generics available for Adsunib 50 Capsule.
Adsunib 50 Capsule blocks an enzyme which promotes the growth and spread of cancer cells.
This enzyme is called protein kinase and is present on the surface of cancer cells.
Blocking this enzyme stops the spread of cancer.
Examples of other protein kinase inhibitors are erlotinib, gefitinib, lapatinib, vemurafenib and dasatinib.
Can Adsunib 50 Capsule be used in combination with other chemotherapy medicines?
There are no studies that support the use of Adsunib 50 Capsule with other chemotherapy medicines.
For example, Adsunib 50 Capsule is used in Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST), a type of cancer of the stomach and bowel, when imatinib (another anticancer medicine) no longer works or the patient cannot take imatinib.
=

Is Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR an antibiotic?
Yes, Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR is a type of antibiotic which belongs to a group of medicines called macrolides.
It is mostly used after organ transplantation.
This medicine’s immune-suppressing property helps prevent organ rejection after kidney, heart, or liver transplant.
Which vaccines should not be taken while taking Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR?
You should avoid taking any live vaccines (vaccines that use pathogens that are still alive, but are attenuated, that is, weakened) while taking Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR.
These may include vaccinations for measles, mumps, rubella, BCG (TB vaccine), yellow fever, chicken pox and typhoid.
You should also avoid taking polio drops (by mouth) or flu vaccine (through nose).
Who should not take Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR?
Patients who are allergic to it or have a weak immune system, high blood pressure, and kidney failure should avoid Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR.
This medicine should also be avoided in pregnant or breastfeeding women, and in people who plan to receive any live vaccines (e.g.
What should I tell my doctor before taking Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR?
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant, have allergies, long-term infection, high blood sugar, or high blood pressure.
You should also inform your doctor if you have high blood potassium levels or a weakened immune system.
Tell your doctor if you have a history of any medication, have recently received, or are scheduled to receive a live vaccine.
What should I be aware of before I start taking Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR?
This medicine suppresses the immune system and hence there is always an increased risk of infection.
Moreover, in some cases, Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR can increase the risk of some kind of cancer like skin and lymph gland cancer (lymphoma).
It can lower the ability of your immune system to fight infections.
Consult your doctor before you start taking this medication and in case you notice any symptoms of infections like fever, sweats or chills, cough or flu-like symptoms, muscle aches, warm, red, or painful areas on your skin.
Does Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR have an abuse potential?
No, Advagraf 3mg Capsule PR does not have abuse potential and thus, is not a controlled substance.
Controlled substances have potential for abuse so they need permission from authorities and doctors for use.
=

How long does Advancef 500mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Advancef 500mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Advancef 500mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Advancef 500mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Advancef 500mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Advancef 500mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Advancef 500mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Advancef 500mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Advancef 500mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

For how long should I take Advastat 5mg Tablet?
You may need to take Advastat 5mg Tablet for life or for as long as directed by your doctor.
The cholesterol levels will be maintained only till you are taking Advastat 5mg Tablet.
Stopping Advastat 5mg Tablet without starting a different treatment may increase your cholesterol levels again.
This medicine has only a few side effects and is usually considered safe if taken as directed by the doctor.
Does Advastat 5mg Tablet cause weight gain?
No, there is no evidence of Advastat 5mg Tablet causing weight gain.
If you are taking Advastat 5mg Tablet and gaining weight, consult your doctor.
The doctor may get some investigations done to know the reason for the weight gain.
Does Advastat 5mg Tablet make you tired?
Yes, Advastat 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired.
This is because it reduces the energy supply to the muscles in the body.
However, the exact reason behind the phenomenon is unknown and needs more research.
Generalized fatigue is more often in people with heart disease or those suffering from liver illness.
Advastat 5mg Tablet also causes muscle damage which further worsens the tiredness.
Therefore, you must consult your doctor if you feel tired while taking Advastat 5mg Tablet.
Should Advastat 5mg Tablet be taken at night?
Advastat 5mg Tablet should be taken once a day.
It can be taken in the morning or at night or any time of the day, with or without food.
Try taking this medicine at the same time every day.
Doing this will help you remember to take it daily.
What foods should be avoided when taking Advastat 5mg Tablet?
Advastat 5mg Tablet is used to decrease your blood cholesterol levels.
Therefore, to seek the best results of this medicine, you should avoid foods that are high in calories like fried food and junk food.
It is recommended to eat a low-fat and low-cholesterol diet.
Be sure to follow all the exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietician.
How do I know whether Advastat 5mg Tablet is beneficial for me or not?
All medicines have side effects, but the benefits of Advastat 5mg Tablet in reducing cholesterol levels and the risk of heart attack and stroke are proven by a large number of studies.
However, if you do have any concerns, then discuss it with your doctor.
Your doctor will consider and explain to you the benefits of taking Advastat 5mg Tablet versus the risks of not taking it at all.
=

Advent 150mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Advent 150mg Injection?
Advent 150mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Advent 150mg Injection administered?
Advent 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Advent 150mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Advent 150mg Injection?
The use of Advent 150mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Advent 150mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Advent 150mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Advent 150mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Advent 150mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Advent 150mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Advent 150mg Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Advent 150mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can Advent 150mg Injection cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Advent 150mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
Can the use of Advent 150mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Advent 150mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine as well and cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange?
Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange cause diarrhea?
Yes, Advent 91.4mg Drops Tangy Orange may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

How long does it take for Advinafil 100mg Tablet to work?
The amount of time Advinafil 100mg Tablet takes to work varies from person to person, but it normally takes between half an hour and one hour.
However, Advinafil 100mg Tablet may take longer to start working if you take it with a heavy meal.
Its effect may last for about 3-4 hours.
Can I get Advinafil 100mg Tablet without a prescription?
No, you need a doctor's prescription to get Advinafil 100mg Tablet since it is a prescription medicine.
Your doctor will prescribe it only if they judge that it would be beneficial for you.
Can I take Advinafil 100mg Tablet as often as I want?
No, do not take Advinafil 100mg Tablet for more than once a day.
If you take more Advinafil 100mg Tablet than the recommended dose then you may experience an increase in side effects and their severity.
These side effects include flushing, headache, muscle pain, stomach upset, allergic reactions and vision changes such as blurred vision.
Contact your doctor if Advinafil 100mg Tablet does not help you to get an erection, or if your erection does not last long enough for you to complete sexual intercourse.
When should I take Advinafil 100mg Tablet?
Take Advinafil 100mg Tablet about 1 hour before you plan to have sex.
Swallow the tablet whole with a glass of water.
Inform your doctor if you feel the effect of Advinafil 100mg Tablet is too strong or too weak.
Can I take Advinafil 100mg Tablet for premature ejaculation?
No, Advinafil 100mg Tablet is not known to have any beneficial effects in treating premature ejaculation.
It is used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.
Why is the use of Advinafil 100mg Tablet contraindicated with nitrates?
Use of Advinafil 100mg Tablet is harmful for patients taking nitrates or blood pressure-lowering medicines as their combined use can cause a severe fall in blood pressure, which can also result in death.
However, if these medicines are to be taken together then it is advised to keep a time gap of 24 hours between the intake of Penegra and blood pressure-lowering medicines.
Why does Advinafil 100mg Tablet cause a fall in blood pressure (hypotension)?
Advinafil 100mg Tablet has the property of relaxing the smooth muscle of the blood vessels and widening them which can cause a fall in blood pressure (hypotension).
So, when used with blood pressure lowering medicines or nitrates, it can cause a severe fall in blood pressure, which could be fatal.
Advinafil 100mg Tablet should not be taken if you are taking nitrates for chest pain or you have a history of heart attack or stroke in the past 6 months.
Can I take Advinafil 100mg Tablet in my twenties?
Yes, if prescribed by your doctor then Advinafil 100mg Tablet can be taken in your twenties.
Does Advinafil 100mg Tablet increase blood pressure?
No, Advinafil 100mg Tablet is not associated with an increase in blood pressure.
However, it can cause a decrease in blood pressure especially if taken with other blood pressure-lowering medications.
Please consult your doctor before taking Advinafil 100mg Tablet with any other medicine.
Is Advinafil 100mg Tablet safe to use in patients with diabetes?
Yes, if prescribed by your doctor then Advinafil 100mg Tablet is safe to use in patients with diabetes.
Does Advinafil 100mg Tablet affect fertility?
No, Advinafil 100mg Tablet does not affect fertility, neither negatively nor positively.
Does Advinafil 100mg Tablet affect sperm?
Advinafil 100mg Tablet does not affect sperm count or its health.
It is a medicine that is used to treat erectile dysfunction.
=

Advotrax 1000mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Advotrax 1000mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Advotrax 1000mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Advotrax 1000mg Injection?
Advotrax 1000mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Advotrax 1000mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Advotrax 1000mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Advotrax 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Advotrax 1000mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Advotrax 1000mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Advotrax 1000mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Advotrax 1000mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Advotrax 1000mg Injection administered?
Advotrax 1000mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Advotrax 1000mg Injection.
=

How long does Adxime 500mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Adxime 500mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Adxime 500mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Adxime 500mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Adxime 500mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Adxime 500mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Adxime 500mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Adxime 500mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Adxime 500mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

Adylin-PGN Tablet SR is a combination of three medicines: Gabapentin, Nortriptyline and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
This medicine calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Adylin-PGN Tablet SR when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Adylin-PGN Tablet SR even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Adylin-PGN Tablet SR, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR?
Adylin-PGN Tablet SR can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Adylin-PGN Tablet SR may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights, or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Can the use of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR affect my sexual life?
The use of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly observed problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss them with your doctor but do not stop taking Adylin-PGN Tablet SR.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR?
Serious side effects because of Adylin-PGN Tablet SR are uncommon and rare.
Consult your doctor if you notice any of the following: changes in body temperature, difficulty in breathing, increased heartbeat (palpitations), weakness, unsteadiness when walking, reduced coordination or slowed reactions, unusual changes in mood or behavior (such as restlessness, nervousness or excitement), signs of depression, seeing or hearing things that are not there, irrational thinking, blurred or double vision, uncontrollable jerky eye movements, difficulty seeing, signs of frequent infections such as fever, severe chills, sore throat or mouth ulcers.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and need urgent medical attention.
=

Adzclav 625 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Adzclav 625 Tablet?
Adzclav 625 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Adzclav 625 Tablet?
The use of Adzclav 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Adzclav 625 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Adzclav 625 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Adzclav 625 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Adzclav 625 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Adzclav 625 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Adzclav 625 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Adzclav 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Adzclav 625 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Adzclav 625 Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension be stored?
Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension?
Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Adzo-AP Kid Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Can the use of Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Adzo-D Syrup Sugar Free?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Aecan P Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Aecan P Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Aecan P Syrup be stored?
Aecan P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Aecan P Syrup?
Aecan P Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Aecan P Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Aecan P Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Can the use of Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aecef S 500mg/250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aece-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aece-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aece-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aece-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aece-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aece-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Aece-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

What if I give too much of Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension by mistake?
If you think you have given too much of Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Although an extra dose of Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension does not usually cause any harm, overdoses do increase the risk of unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension?
Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aedicef-CV Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
The color of mucus does not represent the kind of infection your child has.
So, yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During the common cold, it is normal for the symptoms to last for 7-10 days and for the mucus to change texture and color.
My child is having a sore throat and ear infection.
More than 80% of sore throats and ear infections are caused by a virus, and antibiotics are not given for viral infections.
If your child has a sore throat, runny nose, a barky cough, pain, and discharge from the ear, it is most likely because of a virus.
Consult your child’s doctor to seek guidance.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aedicof Plus Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take Aedicof Plus Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using Aedicof Plus Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Aedicof Plus Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

Does Aedig 0.3mg Tablet cause weight loss?
There is evidence that normal doses of Aedig 0.3mg Tablet do not cause significant weight loss.
However, very high doses of this medicine can affect the absorption of food, thereby causing weight loss.
Do not take this medication for weight loss as it is not approved for the treatment of obesity.
Do consult your doctor before starting this medication.
How should you take Aedig 0.3mg Tablet?
Aedig 0.3mg Tablet is usually prescribed to be taken orally three times daily immediately before each meal.
Aedig 0.3mg Tablet may be given along with a controlled diet.
However, in case Aedig 0.3mg Tablet does not work alone, it may be given along with a proper diet and other antidiabetic medicines.
Your doctor may further increase your doses if the given doses do not provide sufficient control over the blood sugar levels.
=

What if I give too much of Aediof Oral Suspension by mistake?
An extra dose of Aediof Oral Suspension is unlikely to harm.
However, if you think you have given too much to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects such as seizures, tremors, severe headache, sudden weakness, unconsciousness, and palpitations (irregularities of heartbeat).
Rush to your child’s doctor on an immediate basis if you notice any of these symptoms.
What should I do if my child shows no improvement even after taking Aediof Oral Suspension for the prescribed duration?
Ineffective treatment with Aediof Oral Suspension could mean that the medicine is not able to act against the infection-causing bacteria.
In such a case, visit your child’s doctor who may prescribe some other antibiotic that would be more specific in action.
Not all medicines are given by oral route, some may have to be given by IV route (intravenous injection) in the hospital.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aediof Oral Suspension?
Aediof Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aediof Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aediof Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
What should I tell the doctor before giving Aediof Oral Suspension to my child?
Inform the doctor if your child is suffering from a heart disease, genetic disorders involving blood vessels, seizures, psychiatric disorders, diabetes, photoallergy (allergy from sunlight), neuromuscular disorders, or rheumatoid arthritis.
This is because there is a possibility that Aediof Oral Suspension may aggravate these conditions and result in complications.
=

Can I put Aedit EP Soap on an open wound?
Aedit EP Soap can be used as an antiseptic to treat or prevent infections in wounds such as ulcers, small burns or cuts, and other minor injuries.
However, take special care if you are applying Aedit EP Soap on open large wounds or where the skin is broken like burns.
The reason being there may be a risk of excessive absorption of iodine in the blood which may increase to toxic levels.
Will Aedit EP Soap solution stain my skin or clothes?
Aedit EP Soap has a natural golden brown color which stains the area where you have applied it.
It does not however, permanently stain your skin and fingernails.
The stain can be easily removed from your clothes with soap and water.
Where can Aedit EP Soap be used?
Aedit EP Soap is used in the treatment and prevention of infection in wounds including cuts, small areas of burn, ulcers and minor injuries.
Do not use this medicine on deep wounds and clean surgical wounds.
How should Aedit EP Soap solution be applied to an injury?
Clean the affected area and apply a small amount of the medicine to it.
You can then cover it with a sterile bandage.
You can apply this medicine 1 to 3 times daily.
However, do not use it for longer than 1 week.
Can Aedit EP Soap affect thyroid function?
Using Aedit EP Soap over a large area or for a long time may sometimes cause problems with your thyroid.
Symptoms of thyroid dysfunction include weight loss, increased appetite, sweating, lack of energy, and weight gain.
If you notice such symptoms, contact your doctor who may advise you to stop using Aedit EP Soap.
Can I put Aedit EP Soap on an open wound?
Aedit EP Soap can be used as an antiseptic to treat or prevent infections in wounds such as ulcers, small burns or cuts, and other minor injuries.
However, take special care if you are applying Aedit EP Soap on open large wounds or where the skin is broken like burns.
The reason being there may be a risk of excessive absorption of iodine in the blood which may increase to toxic levels.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aefen SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aefen SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aefen SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aefen SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Aelcid O Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What if I miss a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember.
But, skip the missed dose if it is time for your next dose.
Can the use of Aelcid O Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aelcid O Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Aelcid O Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Aelcid O Syrup can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits, and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or taking a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about if persistent constipation occurs.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aelcid O Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What if I give too much Aelcold Oral Drops by mistake?
Prolonged or excess intake of Aelcold Oral Drops can put your child at risk of developing serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, /depression, cognition defects, and inability to concentrate.
Always stick to the prescribed dose.
To pour out the right dose, use the calibrated cup provided with the medicine by the manufacturer.
Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not give the correct estimate.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aelcold Oral Drops?
Aelcold Oral Drops can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aelcold Oral Drops.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
In what all conditions should I avoid giving Aelcold Oral Drops to my child?
If your child is suffering from any Cardiovascular disease (hypertension, heart disease), Diabetes mellitus, GI obstruction, increased intraocular pressure, urinary obstruction, or thyroid dysfunction, avoid giving Aelcold Oral Drops.
Always inform your doctor about your child’s medical history before giving Aelcold Oral Drops.
My child has a cough and fever.
Can I give him two different cough and fever medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by the doctor.
This is because both the medicines could have the same ingredients and taking them together would cause an overdose and could result in serious implications on your child.
Always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines specifically formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before use in your child.
Give the medicine to your child in the prescribed dose specifically.
It is best to take your child to the doctor if the symptoms are bothersome or fail to improve even after treatment.
Can Aelcold Oral Drops make my child sleepy?
Aelcold Oral Drops may cause mild drowsiness effect, making your child feel sleepy.
So, be cautious and never give this medicine to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
It’s always best to consult your child’s doctor before giving this medicine to your child.
How can I store Aelcold Oral Drops?
Aelcold Oral Drops should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

What is Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops used for?
Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops is used for the treatment of allergic conditions that cause runny nose or stuffy nose, sneezing and inflammation of the sinuses.
Is Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops safe?
Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What should I know before using Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops?
Before using Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops, you should tell your doctor if you are allergic to Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops or any of its ingredients to avoid any allergic reactions.
Let your doctor know if you have or ever had any problems related to your eyes.
Inform your doctor about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant, planning to conceive or breastfeeding to prevent any harmful effects on the baby.
What should I do if I forget to use Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops?
If you forget to use Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops, do not worry and continue using Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops as soon as you remember.
However, if you are not sure or have any other doubts, please consult your doctor.
Is Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops effective?
Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aelmet 0.1% Nasal Drops too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

How long does Aeloxim 500mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Aeloxim 500mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Aeloxim 500mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Aeloxim 500mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Aeloxim 500mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Aeloxim 500mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Aeloxim 500mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Aeloxim 500mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Aeloxim 500mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

How long does Aeltax TZ 1000mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Aeltax TZ 1000mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aeltax TZ 1000mg/125mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

What if I give too much of Aelxim 50mg Tablet by mistake?
An extra dose of Aelxim 50mg Tablet is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Aelxim 50mg Tablet to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aelxim 50mg Tablet?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aelxim 50mg Tablet?
Aelxim 50mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aelxim 50mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aelxim 50mg Tablet?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Aelxim 50mg Tablet on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

How long does Aelzime 250mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Aelzime 250mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Aelzime 250mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Aelzime 250mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Aelzime 250mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Aelzime 250mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Aelzime 250mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Aelzime 250mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Aelzime 250mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

What is Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Aenzo 0.25mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Can the use of Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aeoncef XP 1000mg/500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

How is Aequimol IV Infusion administered?
Aequimol IV Infusion should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only.
The dose of the medicine will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Aequimol IV Infusion.
What if I vomit after taking Aequimol IV Infusion?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Aequimol IV Infusion tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
What are the serious side effects of taking an excess of the Aequimol IV Infusion?
Overdose of Aequimol IV Infusione may cause severe life-threatening liver injury.
Taking more than the prescribed dose may also cause kidney injury, decreased platelet count, and even coma.
Early symptoms of an overdose include nausea, vomiting, and general tiredness.
Immediately consult a doctor or reach an emergency in case of a suspected overdose.
When will I feel better after taking the Aequimol IV Infusion?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Aequimol IV Infusion.
Is Aequimol IV Infusion an antibiotic?
No, Aequimol IV Infusion is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
=

Can the use of Aero-AX Tablet SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aero-AX Tablet SR can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
Can I use Aero-AX Tablet SR while breastfeeding?
No, Aero-AX Tablet SR should not be used by breastfeeding mothers.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Aero-AX Tablet SR?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Aero-AX Tablet SR.
Drinking alcohol will increase the risk of serious side effects caused by Aero-AX Tablet SR.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aero-AX Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How long does Aerocef-TZ 500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Aerocef-TZ 500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aerocef-TZ 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Yes, Aerodef Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Aerodef Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Aerodef Tablet used for?
Aerodef Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
Aerodef Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Aerodef Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Aerodef Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Aerodef Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
No, Aerodef Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
Can I take Aerodef Tablet with Tamsulosin?
Yes, Aerodef Tablet can be taken with Tamsulosin.
No harmful effects or any other interactions have been reported when they are used together.
=

Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Aeromax 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

What is Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet?
Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet?
Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aero P 50mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet be taken with food?
It is advisable to take Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet with food or immediately after food since this medicine may cause stomach upset.
Can Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet stop menstruation?
No, Mefspas does not have any effect on menstrual bleeding, neither does it affect the amount nor the duration of bleeding.
It does not affect the menstrual cycle and helps relieve the pain caused due to menstrual cramps.
How long should I take Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet?
Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet is not prescribed to be taken on a regular basis.
Therefore, it is advised to take Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet for the shortest possible time advised by the doctor or only when you experience menstrual pain.
Is there any harm if I drive after taking the medicine?
Yes, you should try to avoid driving after taking Aerospas 10mg/250mg Tablet as this medicine may cause dizziness or sleepiness.
These side effects get worse with the consumption of alcohol.
=

What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of AEROTAZ INHALER?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of AEROTAZ INHALER may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness, tremors, and lack of energy.
High doses of AEROTAZ INHALER may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body, and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Is it safe to take AEROTAZ INHALER if I have heart disease?
Yes, AEROTAZ INHALER is considered safe, but its use depends on the severity of your heart problem.
If you experience chest pain or any other symptom of worsening heart disease while taking AEROTAZ INHALER, seek immediate medical advice.
Being a diabetic, what should I remember while taking AEROTAZ INHALER?
AEROTAZ INHALER may cause blood sugar levels to rise.
Therefore, your doctor may adjust your dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines.
Keep a regular check on your blood glucose levels and do not miss any appointments.
Consult your doctor if you experience a sudden rise in blood sugar levels.
I have started using AEROTAZ INHALER and I am experiencing headaches and shakiness.
Is this because of AEROTAZ INHALER and will these go away?
Yes, it could be due to AEROTAZ INHALER.
Feeling shaky is a common side effect of AEROTAZ INHALER which goes away after some time.
For headaches, drink plenty of water, get sufficient rest and avoid alcohol.
Usually headaches go away after a week.
If they persist for a long time, contact your doctor.
When should I take AEROTAZ INHALER?
Use AEROTAZ INHALER as and when you need it.
AEROTAZ INHALER relieves the symptoms of asthma like coughing, shortness of breath and tightness in the chest.
You can also take it to prevent asthma attacks in circumstances where you know it may occur (e.g., after strenuous exercise or unavoidable exposure to allergen).
Can I smoke if I have been prescribed AEROTAZ INHALER?
No, you should not smoke while taking AEROTAZ INHALER.
The medicine may make breathing more difficult, especially in patients who have asthma.
Take advice from your doctor if you are finding it hard to avoid smoking.
=

How long does Aerotrop Inhalation take to work?
Aerotrop Inhalation starts working within 30 minutes of taking it and you may start breathing with ease after the first dose.
The full benefits will be experienced within about 3 days to a week’s time.
No, Aerotrop Inhalation is not a steroid, but it belongs to anticholinergic class of medicines.
It works by relaxing the muscles of the small airways, helping them to open and remain open for 24 hours.
How can Aerotrop Inhalation help me?
Aerotrop Inhalation is a long-acting bronchodilator which opens the air passages and makes breathing easier.
Using this medicine daily can help prevent sudden short-term worsening of your breathing problem.
Regular use also helps relieve shortness of breath when you have ongoing shortness of breath.
What should I avoid while taking Aerotrop Inhalation?
Use Aerotrop Inhalation carefully to prevent it from getting into your eyes.
If it gets into your eyes, your vision may get blurry and the pupil in your eye may become larger (dilate).
If this happens, call your doctor.
Aerotrop Inhalation may also cause dizziness and blurred vision.
Avoid driving or using heavy machinery if you experience these side effects.
How long do I need to take Aerotrop Inhalation?
Your doctor may prescribe you to take this medicine for life long.
The reason being, COPD is a chronic condition and requires long-term treatment.
What is the difference between rescue treatment and maintenance treatment?
Rescue treatment is used to treat the sudden attack of disease.
On the other hand, maintenance treatment are medicines that you take daily to help you manage the symptoms of disease.
For example, when you have sudden shortness of breath due to COPD, you may be prescribed corticosteroids.
Whereas, to help prevent these sudden attacks from happening, you may be prescribed Aerotrop Inhalation.
What is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?
COPD is a serious lung disease in which the airways become narrow, so the air moves out of your lungs slowly and makes it hard to breathe.
Examples of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease include chronic bronchitis (swelling of the air passages leading to lungs) and emphysema (damage to air sacs in the lungs).
Can I prevent my COPD from getting worse?
If you smoke, then quitting smoking is one of the most important things you can do to slow the progression of COPD.
In fact, keep taking the medicine as advised by your doctor.
Following the prescribed dose for the recommended duration may stop the progression of COPD.
How should Aerotrop Inhalation be stored?
Store Aerotrop Inhalation at room temperature 68°F to 77°F (20°C to 25°C).
Keep it away from heat and cold and do not refrigerate it.
Keep it in a dry place.
=

Is Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler better than Albuterol?
Both Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Is it safe to take Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler if I have heart disease?
Yes, it is considered safe, but its use depends on the severity of your heart problem.
If you experience chest pain or any other symptom of worsening heart disease while taking Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler, seek immediate medical advice.
Being a diabetic, what should I remember while taking Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler?
Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler may cause blood sugar levels to rise.
Therefore, your doctor may adjust your dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines.
Keep a regular check on your blood glucose levels and do not miss any dose.
Consult your doctor if you experience a sudden rise in blood sugar levels.
I have started using Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler and I am experiencing headaches and shakiness.
Is this because of Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler and will these go away?
Yes, it could be due to Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler.
Feeling shaky is a common side effect of Aerozest 50mcg Inhaler which usually goes away after some time.
For headaches, drink plenty of water, get sufficient rest and avoid alcohol.
Usually, headaches go away after a week.
If they persist for a long time, contact your doctor.
=

What if I give too much of Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension by mistake?
An extra dose of Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension?
Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Aeson 50mg Oral Suspension on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Aexo 100mg Tablet?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Aexo 100mg Tablet need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Aexo 100mg Tablet, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Aexo 100mg Tablet be taken?
Aexo 100mg Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Aexo 100mg Tablet?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Aexo 100mg Tablet.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Aexo 100mg Tablet be avoided?
Aexo 100mg Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Aexo 100mg Tablet, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Aexo 100mg Tablet.
=

What is AF 50 Tablet DT used for?
AF 50 Tablet DT is an antifungal medicine.
It is used for the treatment of many fungal infections like Cryptococcal meningitis (fungal infection in the brain) and Coccidioidomycosis (a disease of the lungs).
Additionally, it is helpful in the treatment of infections caused by Candida found in the bloodstream, body organs (e.g., heart, lungs) or urinary tract, mucosal thrush (infection affecting the lining of the mouth, throat, and denture sore mouth), and genital thrush (infection of the vagina or penis).
It can also be used to treat skin infections like athlete's foot, ringworm, jock itch, nail infection.
Can AF 50 Tablet DT be taken with oral contraceptives (OCPs) or birth control pills?
AF 50 Tablet DT has been reported to have a minor interaction when taken with estradiol (a component of oral contraceptives).
It can increase the level or effect of estradiol when given along with it.
Before starting the treatment with AF 50 Tablet DT inform your doctor if you are taking birth control pills.
Can AF 50 Tablet DT cause hair loss?
AF 50 Tablet DT may cause hair loss as a rare side effect.
If during the treatment you experience hair loss, inform your doctor.
Is AF 50 Tablet DT effective?
Yes, AF 50 Tablet DT is effective when used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using AF 50 Tablet DT too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Is AF 50 Tablet DT fungistatic or fungicidal?
AF 50 Tablet DT is primarily fungistatic which means it controls the growth of fungus).
However, it may also act as a fungicidal (kills fungus) medicine against certain organisms, specifically Cryptococcus in a dose-dependent manner, specifically Cryptococcus.
Does AF 50 Tablet DT treat urinary tract infection (UTI)?
AF 50 Tablet DT is used to treat urinary tract infections (UTI) caused mainly by Candida.
However, bacteria growth can also cause UTI in some cases.
If you are suffering from UTI, please consult your doctor as the cause of infection (fungal or bacterial, or other) needs to be identified before the start of any treatment.
Can I take AF 50 Tablet DT with alcohol?
Yes, AF 50 Tablet DT can be taken with alcohol.
No interactions have been reported between the two.
However, it is better to consult your doctor on the use of alcohol before taking AF 50 Tablet DT to avoid any side effects and get the maximum benefit of AF 50 Tablet DT.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Afasma 100mg Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Afasma 100mg Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Afasma 100mg Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Afasma 100mg Capsule be taken?
Afasma 100mg Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Afasma 100mg Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Afasma 100mg Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Afasma 100mg Capsule be avoided?
Afasma 100mg Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Afasma 100mg Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Afasma 100mg Capsule.
Is Afasma 100mg Capsule the same as theophylline?
Afasma 100mg Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Afasma 100mg Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What is AF -C Dusting Powder used for?
AF -C Dusting Powder is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal skin infections such as ringworm (fungal skin infection that causes a red scaly rash on different parts of the body), athlete’s foot (fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), fungal nappy rash and fungal sweat rash.
It is also used to relieve irritation of the vulva (external thrush) and irritation occurring at the end of the penis, which may be associated with thrush.
AF -C Dusting Powder is effective against which fungi?
AF -C Dusting Powder is effective against Trichophyton species which cause ringworm infection, athlete’s foot, and jock itch (fungal infection of the skin in the groin or buttocks).
It is also effective against yeast known as Candida which commonly causes vaginal thrush (infection caused by an overgrowth of yeast called Candida albicans).
I have started using AF -C Dusting Powder.
By when can I expect to start seeing the improvements?
The symptoms of skin infection, such as itching or soreness, should improve within a few days of treatment.
However, the signs such as redness and scaling may take longer to disappear.
Do not stop applying this medicine before the duration advised by your doctor, even if you feel better.
What precautions are necessary while applying AF -C Dusting Powder?
Always wash your hands thoroughly before and after applying AF -C Dusting Powder.
If you are using the cream for an infected foot, wash and dry your feet thoroughly before applying the cream, especially between the toes, before applying the cream.
AF -C Dusting Powder should be applied thinly and evenly and rubbed gently onto the affected areas two or three times daily.
For how long should I apply AF -C Dusting Powder? Can I stop if the symptoms have completely disappeared?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection.
In general, the treatment is continued for 1 month for tinea infection and for at least 15 days for candida infection.
Do not stop the treatment on your own even if you feel better because the infection may come back as it takes some time to kill the fungus.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Afclav 625 LB Tablet?
Afclav 625 LB Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Afclav 625 LB Tablet?
Afclav 625 LB Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Afclav 625 LB Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Afclav 625 LB Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Afclav 625 LB Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Afderm 200 Capsule used for?
Afderm 200 Capsule is used to treat fungal infections caused by Trichophyton spp., Microsporum spp., and Epidermophyton floccosum.
The infections caused could be ringworm infection, infection of the feet, or infection in the groin and buttocks.
This medicine also treats persistent infection of fingernails and toenails, persistent candida (yeast) infections of vagina or candida (yeast) infections of the mouth or throat in patients with lower disease resistance.
It is also used in the treatment of cryptococcal infection and infections caused by Histoplasma, aspergillus, and Blastomyces.
For how long do I need to take Afderm 200 Capsule?
The dose and length of treatment depends on the type and site of infection and your response to the treatment.
For example, if you are taking Afderm 200 Capsule for athlete’s foot (fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), the dose may need to be taken for 30 days, on the other hand, if you are taking it for candidal infection of the vagina, the dose may span from 1 day to 3 days depending on the dosage advised by the doctor.
I am taking Afderm 200 Capsule for nail infection but there does not seem to be any improvement.
No, you should not stop taking Afderm 200 Capsule without completing the entire course because doing so may not completely cure the fungal infection.
It usually takes about 6-9 months for nail lesions to disappear because after the medicine eliminates the fungus, the new nail takes several months to grow.
Do not worry if you do not see any improvement during the treatment.
Why has my doctor asked me to get blood tests done?
Your doctor is probably trying to monitor your liver’s functioning.
Afderm 200 Capsule may cause serious liver damage.
Therefore, if you develop loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, or abdominal pain while taking Afderm 200 Capsule, you should tell your doctor immediately.
Can I take antacid and Afderm 200 Capsule together?
Afderm 200 Capsule can be utilized by the body if there is sufficient acid in the stomach.
Medicines for stomach ulcers, heartburn, or indigestion neutralize the acid produced by the stomach.
Therefore, take antacids or any such medicine about 2 hours after taking Afderm 200 Capsule.
If you are taking antacids (medicines that stop the production of stomach acid), take Afderm 200 Capsule capsules with a drink of cola.
What is drug resistance? Is it possible to develop resistance to Afderm 200 Capsule?
Sometimes it happens that the fungi get modified in your body and the medicine no longer works.
Resistance to Afderm 200 Capsule has been reported with some candida species (krusei, glabrata, and tropicalis).
Afderm 200 Capsule should not be used for infection caused due to these species.
Take the complete course of Afderm 200 Capsule to avoid drug resistance.
=

Is Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet the same as Glipizide?
No, Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet and Glipizide are different medicines.
However, they belong to the same class of medicines called sulfonylureas and are used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults.
Does Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet play any role in the treatment of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)?
No, Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet is not known to have any role in the treatment of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
Also, there is no clinical evidence available regarding the same.
Why should Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet be used cautiously in elderly patients?
Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet should be used with extra caution in elderly patients because they are at high risk of getting low blood sugar (hypoglycemic event).
Is Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet useful in the management of prediabetes?
Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet is not used for the management of prediabetes, a condition with blood glucose levels higher than normal but not high enough to label you as diabetic.
There are clinical studies available, but the evidence is not strong enough for its use in prediabetes.
How is Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet different from Teneligliptin?
Both Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet and Teneligliptin are antidiabetic medicines and control blood sugar levels effectively.
However, they work in different ways and may show different kinds of side effects.
Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet commonly causes hypoglycemia and weight gain while Teneligliptin causes headache and nasopharyngitis.
Teneligliptin causes hypoglycemia when used along with insulins or sulfonylureas and does not cause weight gain.
Can I skip Afdiex 2.5mg Tablet for a few days?
=

What is Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Dicyclomine and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving stomach pain.
It works by relaxing the muscles of the stomach and intestine by decreasing the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
Is it safe to use Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, dryness of mouth, blurred vision, sleepiness, weakness and nervousness.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet is usually used for short-term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
It should be used carefully in patients with alcohol dependency or with underlying kidney or liver damage.
Can the use of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet is usually safe to use in the dose as recommended by the doctor.
However, an overdose of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause damage to the liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase the risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine is not recommended in patients with the severe liver disease.
Can I take a higher dose of this medicine than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Afdispas 20 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Afec-P 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
Yes, Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet?
The use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be taken with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lower the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Afemol TH 100mg/4mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Afenak Plus S 100mg/325mg/10mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

What is Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Afen P 100 mg/500 mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet?
Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet?
Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Afeslin Duo 875mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is AFFEN 100MG TABLET a good painkiller?
AFFEN 100MG TABLET is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
AFFEN 100MG TABLET is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does AFFEN 100MG TABLET get you high?
No, AFFEN 100MG TABLET does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can AFFEN 100MG TABLET hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of AFFEN 100MG TABLET may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, AFFEN 100MG TABLET can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of AFFEN 100MG TABLET?
If you forget a dose of AFFEN 100MG TABLET, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does AFFEN 100MG TABLET make you drowsy?
AFFEN 100MG TABLET can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about AFFEN 100MG TABLET?
It is important to know that AFFEN 100MG TABLET may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of AFFEN 100MG TABLET may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can AFFEN 100MG TABLET be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take AFFEN 100MG TABLET during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of AFFEN 100MG TABLET can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using AFFEN 100MG TABLET during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, AFFEN 100MG TABLET may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Is Affitor 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Affitor 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Affitor 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Affitor 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Affitor 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Affitor 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Affitor 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Affitor 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Affitor 10mg Tablet?
Affitor 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Affitor 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Affitor 10mg Tablet?
Affitor 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Affitor 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Affobis 2.5 Tablet a diuretic?
No, Affobis 2.5 Tablet is not a diuretic.
Affobis 2.5 Tablet is a beta-blocker medicine which works by blocking the hyperactivity of the nerve impulses in the heart.
This relaxes the heart muscles and eventually calms the heart.
What is the best time to take Affobis 2.5 Tablet?
Affobis 2.5 Tablet can be taken anytime in the morning or evening, usually prescribed once daily.
However, your very first dose of Affobis 2.5 Tablet may make you feel dizzy, so it is better to take your first dose at bedtime.
After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you may take it any time of the day.
Follow the advice of your doctor.
It is advised to take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
What if I forget to take a dose of Affobis 2.5 Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Affobis 2.5 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember it.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, take it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
When will I feel better after taking Affobis 2.5 Tablet?
You may not feel any difference after taking Affobis 2.5 Tablet, if you are taking it for high blood pressure.
However, keep taking this medicine as prescribed by your doctor because you will still be getting its full benefits.
If you are taking Affobis 2.5 Tablet for angina or heart failure, it may take several weeks or months to make you feel better.
How many hours does Affobis 2.5 Tablet take to reduce high blood pressure?
Affobis 2.5 Tablet starts showing its effect within 2 hours, but it can take up to 2 to 6 weeks to reach its full effect.
You may not feel any difference in blood pressure, but this does not mean that the medicine is not working.
Take it exactly as directed by your doctor.
It's important to keep taking your medicine in the prescribed dose and duration to get the maximum benefit of Affobis 2.5 Tablet.
Is Affobis 2.5 Tablet safe in pregnancy?
=

Can I feel dizzy after taking Affolmy 40mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Affolmy 40mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly get up from a lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
How long does it take for Affolmy 40mg Tablet to work?
You may notice a decrease in your blood pressure effectively within 1 weeks of starting Affolmy 40mg Tablet.
However, it may take about 2 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
What are some lifestyle changes to make while using Affolmy 40mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes while taking Affolmy 40mg Tablet can boost your health.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having a heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of a heart attack.
Does Affolmy 40mg Tablet have a diuretic?
Affolmy 40mg Tablet does not have a diuretic.
Affolmy 40mg Tablet is a medicine used to lower high blood pressure.
It belongs to a group of medicines called angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB).
These medicines lower blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels.
When prescribed by a doctor, Affolmy 40mg Tablet can also be combined with a diuretic for providing additional benefit in the reduction of blood pressure.
At what time of the day should you take Affolmy 40mg Tablet?
Your doctor may suggest to take your first dose before bedtime, considering that this medicine can make you feel dizzy.
After the very first dose you can take Affolmy 40mg Tablet at any time of the day.
It is important to take this medicine at the same time every day.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Affotel AMH 40 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Affotel AMH 40 Tablet?
Yes, the use of Affotel AMH 40 Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Can I use Affotel AMH 40 Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Affotel AMH 40 Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
It can cause injury and death to the baby.
If you conceive while taking Affotel AMH 40 Tablet, stop taking the medicine and contact your doctor immediately.
The doctor might suggest other ways to lower blood pressure.
What lifestyle changes should I make while using Affotel AMH 40 Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Affotel AMH 40 Tablet.
Stop smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce your risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Affotel AMH 40 Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Affotel AMH 40 Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Affotel AMH 40 Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
=

Can I stop taking Aficef-O Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aficef-O Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Aficef-O Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Aficef-O Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aficef-O Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Aficef-O Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Does the use of Aficef-O Tablet help treat Urinary tract infections (UTIs)?
The use of Aficef-O Tablet is advised in the treatment of Urinary tract infections (UTIs).
What are the treatment options of UTI and how to prevent it?
Take your antibiotics exactly as prescribed and never skip doses.
It will help cure the infection faster.
Change personal hygiene habits and urinate before and after sexual activity.
Drink plenty of water to help clear the bacteria from your body and always try to fully empty your bladder when you pee.
Can I drive while I am taking Aficef-O Tablet?
No, taking Aficef-O Tablet may make you feel sleepy, dizzy or could affect your eyesight.
So, do not drive or use machines until you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aficef-O Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What if I give too much of Afime Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Afime Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Afime Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Afime Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Afime Dry Syrup?
Afime Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Afime Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Afime Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Afime Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

Afineday Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Afineday Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Afineday Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Afineday Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Afineday Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Afineday Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Afineday Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Afineday Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Afineday Tablet.
Will Afineday Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Afineday Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Afitra 400mg Tablet used for?
Afitra 400mg Tablet is used to treat fungal infections caused by Trichophyton spp., Microsporum spp., and Epidermophyton floccosum.
The infections caused could be ringworm infection, infection of the feet, or infection in the groin and buttocks.
This medicine also treats persistent infection of fingernails and toenails, persistent candida (yeast) infections of vagina or candida (yeast) infections of the mouth or throat in patients with lower disease resistance.
It is also used in the treatment of cryptococcal infection and infections caused by Histoplasma, aspergillus, and Blastomyces.
For how long do I need to take Afitra 400mg Tablet?
The dose and length of treatment depends on the type and site of infection and your response to the treatment.
For example, if you are taking Afitra 400mg Tablet for athlete’s foot (fungal infection of the skin on the feet and between the toes), the dose may need to be taken for 30 days, on the other hand, if you are taking it for candidal infection of the vagina, the dose may span from 1 day to 3 days depending on the dosage advised by the doctor.
I am taking Afitra 400mg Tablet for nail infection but there does not seem to be any improvement.
No, you should not stop taking Afitra 400mg Tablet without completing the entire course because doing so may not completely cure the fungal infection.
It usually takes about 6-9 months for nail lesions to disappear because after the medicine eliminates the fungus, the new nail takes several months to grow.
Do not worry if you do not see any improvement during the treatment.
Why has my doctor asked me to get blood tests done?
Your doctor is probably trying to monitor your liver’s functioning.
Afitra 400mg Tablet may cause serious liver damage.
Therefore, if you develop loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, or abdominal pain while taking Afitra 400mg Tablet, you should tell your doctor immediately.
Can I take antacid and Afitra 400mg Tablet together?
Afitra 400mg Tablet can be utilized by the body if there is sufficient acid in the stomach.
Medicines for stomach ulcers, heartburn, or indigestion neutralize the acid produced by the stomach.
Therefore, take antacids or any such medicine about 2 hours after taking Afitra 400mg Tablet.
If you are taking antacids (medicines that stop the production of stomach acid), take Afitra 400mg Tablet capsules with a drink of cola.
What is drug resistance? Is it possible to develop resistance to Afitra 400mg Tablet?
=

What if I give too much of Afix 50mg Tablet by mistake?
An extra dose of Afix 50mg Tablet is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Afix 50mg Tablet to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Afix 50mg Tablet?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Afix 50mg Tablet?
Afix 50mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Afix 50mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Afix 50mg Tablet?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Afix 50mg Tablet on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
=

Can I stop taking AF Kit Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking AF Kit Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of AF Kit Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of AF Kit Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of AF Kit Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of AF Kit Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What if I don't get better after using AF Kit Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
=

Aflict-AP Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aflict-AP Tablet?
Aflict-AP Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aflict-AP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aflict-AP Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aflict-AP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aflict-AP Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aflict-AP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aflict-AP Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aflict-AP Tablet?
The use of Aflict-AP Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aflict-AP Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aflict-AP Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aflict-AP Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Aflict-AP Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aflict-AP Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aflict-AP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aflict-AP Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Aflocin 200 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aflocin 200 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aflocin 200 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aflocin 200 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Aflocin 200 Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Aflocin 200 Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aflocin 200 Tablet.
=

Can the use of Aflotak 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aflotak 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aflotak 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aflotak 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Aflotak 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Aflotak 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aflotak 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Ofloxacin and Ornidazole.
They work by killing the harmful micro-organisms that can cause infection.
Together they help to treat your infection effectively.
Is it safe to use Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
In some patients, it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, headache, dryness in the mouth, heartburn and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Consult your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to ofloxacin or to ornidazole or any medicine which belongs to the quinolone or nitroimidazole group of antimicrobial agents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms which are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I take alcohol while on Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
You should avoid alcohol since it may add to the dizziness and sleepiness caused by Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet.
Consult with your doctor, if you are not sure about the effects of the medicine.
What if I don't get better after using Aflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
=

What should be avoided while taking AFM Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking AFM Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by AFM Tablet.
Can I stop AFM Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, AFM Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to the use of AFM Tablet, inform your doctor.
Can the use of AFM Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of AFM Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of AFM Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of AFM Tablet will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of AFM Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While AFN P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Afoclav 625 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Afoclav 625 Tablet?
Afoclav 625 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Afoclav 625 Tablet?
The use of Afoclav 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Afoclav 625 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Afoclav 625 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Afoclav 625 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Afoclav 625 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Afoclav 625 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Afoclav 625 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Afoclav 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is it safe to use Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER?
Yes, it is safe to use Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER if you take it for the prescribed duration and according to the dosage advised by the doctor.
However, despite taking the prescribed dosage you might experience common side effects like nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, stomach upset, headache, nasal congestion, sore throat, respiratory tract infection and hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Hypoglycemia is relatively common in patients who are taking Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER in combination with insulin or Sulfonylurea.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER lead to hypoglycemia?
The use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER does not usually cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) on its own.
But, it could occur if there is insufficient supplementation of calories while taking this medicine.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
The symptoms are more likely to be noticed if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take any other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
Hence, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
It is recommended to always carry glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
Can the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER?
The use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also considered to be harmful for patients with severe kidney impairment, liver impairment, congestive heart failure, lactic acidosis or diabetic ketoacidosis.
Can the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER cause lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER can lead to lactic acidosis which is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is a very rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore it is avoided in patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER and immediately consult your doctor.
Can the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Afoglip M 500 Tablet ER can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
Deficiency of B12 may cause anemia and nerve problems.
These may further cause a tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
Consult your doctor if you experience these symptoms.
Your doctor may advise monitoring of B12 levels and prescribe a vitamin B12 supplement if required.
=

How long does Aford 500mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Aford 500mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Aford 500mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Aford 500mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Aford 500mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Aford 500mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Aford 500mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Aford 500mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Aford 500mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

Does smoking have any effect on Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet?
Yes, you should not smoke while on this medicine since smoking interferes with its working.
Smoking can decrease the rate at which your symptoms improve.
What food is to be avoided while taking Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet?
It is best if you avoid aged cheese, herring (fish), and red wine.
But, since taking these foods with Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet does not affect blood pressure or heart rate, these can be taken in very small amounts.
Can Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet cause cancer?
Patients of Parkinson’s disease are at a higher risk of skin cancer.
The same risk is also seen in patients taking Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet.
Therefore, you should undergo periodic examinations to detect skin cancer if you are taking Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet.
Is it safe to drive if I am taking Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet?
If you experience excessive daytime sleepiness or fall asleep suddenly, then avoid driving, operate machinery or work at heights during Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet treatment.
One morning I fainted after getting up from bed.
Was it because of Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet? What should I do?
It could be due to Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet.
If you feel lightheaded, dizzy or faint while getting up from bed, get up slowly.
This will help your body get used to the change in position and blood pressure.
If this problem continues or gets worse, talk to your doctor.
I am experiencing a runny nose and cold since I began taking Afrelect 0.5mg Tablet.
No, you should not take Vicks or any other medicine containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
These cold remedies interfere with Rasagiline and are not recommended.
Take your doctor’s advice to treat your runny nose and cold.
=

Follow the directions given by the doctor.
Apply the medicine thinly and in sufficient quantity to cover the affected area.
Wash your hands after using Afserta-B Cream, unless it is used for treating skin infections on the hands.
Can I use Afserta-B Cream while breastfeeding?
It is not recommended to breastfeed while using Afserta-B Cream.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to use Afserta-B Cream.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Afserta-B Cream?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Is it safe to use Afserta-B Cream?
Yes, Afserta-B Cream is safe when used according to your doctor’s advice and for limited duration of time (1-2 weeks).
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted side effects like transient burning, itching and irritation at the application site.
It may also cause other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Afserta-B Cream when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Afserta-B Cream and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the precautions that need to be taken while using Afserta-B Cream?
Afserta-B Cream should not be used on the face.
Do not use the medication for longer than the advised periods of time.
Do not apply a bandage or dressing to the area being treated, as this will increase absorption of the preparation and increase the risk of side effects.
This medicine should only be used by the patient and never be given to other people even if their condition appears to be the same.
=

Why do you have to take Afymont 10mg Tablet at night?
Usually, it is recommended to take Afymont 10mg Tablet in the evening when it is being used for asthma and allergic rhinitis (cough and cold due to allergy).
However, the exact reason for this is not yet known.
Some studies have shown that there is no difference in effectiveness whether Afymont 10mg Tablet is taken in the evening or morning.
Hence, take the medicine as directed by your doctor.
Is Afymont 10mg Tablet a steroid?
No, Afymont 10mg Tablet is not a steroid.
Leukotrienes are natural substances released during an allergic reaction which causes constriction of muscles of airway.
It can also cause allergy symptoms.
This medicine blocks leukotrienes which helps in relieving symptoms of asthma and allergic rhinitis.
Does Afymont 10mg Tablet make you drowsy?
An uncommon side effect of Afymont 10mg Tablet is drowsiness.
Avoid driving or operating heavy machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Consult your doctor if you experience these side effects.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Afymont 10mg Tablet?
Consumption of alcohol should be restricted while taking Afymont 10mg Tablet as it may cause dizziness and drowsiness as a side effect.
Also, liver disorders caused as side effect of Afymont 10mg Tablet may occur more commonly with use of alcohol.
Can Afymont 10mg Tablet cause mood changes?
Yes, although uncommonly but Afymont 10mg Tablet may cause mood changes.
The symptoms of mood change include anxiety, agitation, aggressive behaviour or hostility, irritability, and restlessness.
One may also experience depression and suicidal tendency.
Consult your doctor immediately in case you develop any of these symptoms.
Can Afymont 10mg Tablet cause weird dreams?
Yes, in rare cases Afymont 10mg Tablet may cause night mares, sleeplessness, and sleep walking.
You should contact your doctor if these symptoms persist.
How should Afymont 10mg Tablet be taken?
Afymont 10mg Tablet should be taken exactly as directed by your doctor.
The medicine should be used preferably in the evening with or without food when being used for asthma.
Whereas, for allergic rhinitis, it can be taken at any time of the day but at the same time each day.
But, if you are taking it to avoid breathing difficulties during exercise, it should be taken 2 hours before exercise.
=

Is AG 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, AG 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does AG 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, AG 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for AG 5mg Tablet to work?
AG 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take AG 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking AG 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take AG 5mg Tablet for a long time?
AG 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take AG 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue AG 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take AG 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using AG 5mg Tablet
=

What is Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR when my pain is relieved?
Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause nausea and vomiting.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can I take Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
What is the recommended storage condition for Agatha R 200mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Ageflux 20mg Tablet used for?
Ageflux 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Ageflux 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Ageflux 20mg Tablet to work?
Ageflux 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Ageflux 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Ageflux 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Ageflux 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Ageflux 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ageflux 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Ageflux 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Ageflux 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Ageflux 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is Ageflux 20mg Tablet useful in the treatment of H.
=

Can the use of Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Agelite-D Syrup Sugar Free?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Agex 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Agex 500mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Agex 500mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Agex 500mg Injection?
Agex 500mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Agex 500mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Agex 500mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Agex 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Agex 500mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Agex 500mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Agex 500mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Agex 500mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Agex 500mg Injection administered?
Agex 500mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Agex 500mg Injection.
=

What if I give too much of Agextil 50 Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Agextil 50 Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Agextil 50 Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Agextil 50 Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Agextil 50 Dry Syrup?
Agextil 50 Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Agextil 50 Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Agextil 50 Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Agextil 50 Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
=

How long does Agex-TZ 562.5mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Agex-TZ 562.5mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Agex-TZ 562.5mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Agicold Plus Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol / Acetaminophen and Phenylephrine.
This combination helps to relieve symptoms of cold like runny nose, watery eyes, fever and headache.
It relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing.
Paracetamol blocks the release of certain chemical messengers in the brain that are responsible for pain and fever.
Phenylephrine is a decongestant which narrows the small blood vessels and provides relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Agicold Plus Syrup?
Yes, Agicold Plus Syrup is safe in most patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, sleepiness, headache and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform the doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can I stop taking Agicold Plus Syrup when I am relieved of my symptoms?
Agicold Plus Syrup is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your symptoms are relieved.
However, continue taking this medicine if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Agicold Plus Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Agicold Plus Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Agicold Plus Syrup cause damage to liver?
Agicold Plus Syrup is usually safe when taken according to the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Agicold Plus Syrup can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol, while taking this medicine as it may increase your risk of liver damage.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Agicold Plus Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Agifix-LB Tablet DT as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
How long does Agifix-LB Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Agifix-LB Tablet DT starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Agifix-LB Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Agifix-LB Tablet DT when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Agifix-LB Tablet DT and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Diclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Paracetamol / Acetaminophen has an early onset of action which means that it takes very less time to start its action and it helps in relieving the symptoms till diclofenac starts working.
Is it safe to use Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Yes, Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can I stop taking Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Agile 50 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to painkillers (NSAIDs) or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with the history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Agimont Kid Syrup by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Agimont Kid Syrup be stored?
Agimont Kid Syrup should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Agimont Kid Syrup make my child sleepy?
Agimont Kid Syrup causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Agimont Kid Syrup?
No, don’t start Agimont Kid Syrup without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Agimont Kid Syrup can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Aginal-AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Aginal-AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Aginal-AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Aginal-AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Aginal-AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Aginal-AT Tablet?
Aginal-AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Aginal-AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Aginal-AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Aginal-AT Tablet?
Yes, the use of Aginal-AT Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How quickly does Agiset 4mg Injection work?
Agiset 4mg Injection starts working within half an hour to 2 hours.
It dissolves rapidly into the bloodstream and starts showing its effect.
What are the side effects of Agiset 4mg Injection?
The most common side effects of Agiset 4mg Injection are constipation, diarrhea, fatigue and headache.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own after some time.
Consult your doctor if these persist or worry you.
Is Agiset 4mg Injection a steroid?
No, Agiset 4mg Injection is an antiemetic and not a steroid.
Agiset 4mg Injection is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
It is prescribed for the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting which is commonly observed after surgery or due to cancer chemotherapy.
Does Agiset 4mg Injection work for seasickness?
No, Agiset 4mg Injection does not work for seasickness.
=

Does Agivog 0.2 Tablet cause weight loss?
There is evidence that normal doses of Agivog 0.2 Tablet do not cause significant weight loss.
However, very high doses of this medicine can affect the absorption of food, thereby causing weight loss.
Do not take this medication for weight loss as it is not approved for the treatment of obesity.
Do consult your doctor before starting this medication.
How should you take Agivog 0.2 Tablet?
Agivog 0.2 Tablet is usually prescribed to be taken orally three times daily immediately before each meal.
Agivog 0.2 Tablet may be given along with a controlled diet.
However, in case Agivog 0.2 Tablet does not work alone, it may be given along with a proper diet and other antidiabetic medicines.
Your doctor may further increase your doses if the given doses do not provide sufficient control over the blood sugar levels.
=

What is Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Aglomol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
=

What if I vomit after taking Agmamol 500mg Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Agmamol 500mg Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Agmamol 500mg Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Agmamol 500mg Tablet.
How often can I take the Agmamol 500mg Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Agmamol 500mg Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Agmamol 500mg Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Agmamol 500mg Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Agmamol 500mg Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Agmamol 500mg Tablet safe for children?
Agmamol 500mg Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
Is Agmamol 500mg Tablet an antibiotic?
No, Agmamol 500mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
Can I take Agmamol 500mg Tablet and ibuprofen together?
Ibuprofen and Agmamol 500mg Tablet are safe medicines, but both should not be used together.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Agmoxtin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

Is Agonil 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Agonil 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Agonil 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Agonil 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Agonil 5mg Tablet to work?
Agonil 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Agonil 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Agonil 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Agonil 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Agonil 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Agonil 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Agonil 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Agonil 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Agonil 5mg Tablet
=

Can you become addicted to Agotol 50 Tablet?
If you take Agotol 50 Tablet too much or for a long time, it may become habit-forming (causing mental or physical dependence) or cause an overdose.
So it is important to take it only as directed by your doctor.
What are the risks associated with Agotol 50 Tablet overdose?
Symptoms of an overdose include difficult, fast or slow, or troubled breathing, or pale or blue lips, fingernails, or skin.
Call your doctor right away if you notice these symptoms.
What should I avoid while taking Agotol 50 Tablet?
It is advisable to avoid alcohol, driving, or indulging in any hazardous activity while taking this medicine.
Are there any alternatives to Agotol 50 Tablet?
There are many alternatives to this medicine.
However, you should always check with your doctor or pharmacist before making any change to the dosage or type of medicine you take.
How to dispose of Agotol 50 Tablet safely?
Since Agotol 50 Tablet is an opioid medicine, it's important you dispose of any unwanted medicine safely as it can lead to inappropriate use.
Simply remove the medicine from their original packet and mix them with something undesirable, such as used coffee grounds, dirt, or cat/dog litter.
This makes the medicine less appealing to children and pets and unrecognizable to someone who might intentionally go through the trash looking for drugs.
After this put the mixture in something you can close (a re-sealable zipper storage bag to prevent the drug from leaking or spilling out.
Finally, throw the bag in the garbage.
=

Can I put Agradine 5% Ointment on an open wound?
Agradine 5% Ointment can be used as an antiseptic to treat or prevent infections in wounds such as ulcers, small burns or cuts, and other minor injuries.
However, take special care if you are applying Agradine 5% Ointment on open large wounds or where the skin is broken like burns.
The reason being there may be a risk of excessive absorption of iodine in the blood which may increase to toxic levels.
Will Agradine 5% Ointment solution stain my skin or clothes?
Agradine 5% Ointment has a natural golden brown color which stains the area where you have applied it.
It does not however, permanently stain your skin and fingernails.
The stain can be easily removed from your clothes with soap and water.
Where can Agradine 5% Ointment be used?
Agradine 5% Ointment is used in the treatment and prevention of infection in wounds including cuts, small areas of burn, ulcers and minor injuries.
Do not use this medicine on deep wounds and clean surgical wounds.
How should Agradine 5% Ointment solution be applied to an injury?
Clean the affected area and apply a small amount of the medicine to it.
You can then cover it with a sterile bandage.
You can apply this medicine 1 to 3 times daily.
However, do not use it for longer than 1 week.
Can Agradine 5% Ointment affect thyroid function?
Using Agradine 5% Ointment over a large area or for a long time may sometimes cause problems with your thyroid.
Symptoms of thyroid dysfunction include weight loss, increased appetite, sweating, lack of energy, and weight gain.
If you notice such symptoms, contact your doctor who may advise you to stop using Agradine 5% Ointment.
Can I put Agradine 5% Ointment on an open wound?
Agradine 5% Ointment can be used as an antiseptic to treat or prevent infections in wounds such as ulcers, small burns or cuts, and other minor injuries.
However, take special care if you are applying Agradine 5% Ointment on open large wounds or where the skin is broken like burns.
The reason being there may be a risk of excessive absorption of iodine in the blood which may increase to toxic levels.
Will Agradine 5% Ointment solution stain my skin or clothes?
Agradine 5% Ointment has a natural golden brown color which stains the area where you have applied it.
It does not however, permanently stain your skin and fingernails.
The stain can be easily removed from your clothes with soap and water.
Where can Agradine 5% Ointment be used?
Agradine 5% Ointment is used in the treatment and prevention of infection in wounds including cuts, small areas of burn, ulcers and minor injuries.
Do not use this medicine on deep wounds and clean surgical wounds.
How should Agradine 5% Ointment solution be applied to an injury?
Clean the affected area and apply a small amount of the medicine to it.
You can then cover it with a sterile bandage.
You can apply this medicine 1 to 3 times daily.
However, do not use it for longer than 1 week.
=

Can the use of Agrifib 5mg Infusion increase the risk of bleeding?
Yes, Agrifib 5mg Infusion increases the risk of bleeding.
Always be careful while doing activities that may cause an injury or bleeding.
Tell your doctor immediately if you notice any abnormal bruising or bleeding.
What medicines should I avoid while taking Agrifib 5mg Infusion?
Agrifib 5mg Infusion can interact with several medicines.
Do not take any medicine without talking to your doctor.
When will I feel better after taking Agrifib 5mg Infusion?
Agrifib 5mg Infusion reduces your risk of developing blood clots in the blood vessels of your leg, lungs, heart and brain.
You may not feel any difference after taking Agrifib 5mg Infusion.
=

How long does Agrocef 500mg Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Agrocef 500mg Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Agrocef 500mg Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Agrocef 500mg Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Agrocef 500mg Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Agrocef 500mg Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Agrocef 500mg Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Agrocef 500mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Agrocef 500mg Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

Agthol 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Agthol 250mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Agthol 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Agthol 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Agthol 250mg Tablet be taken at night?
Agthol 250mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Agthol 250mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Agthol 250mg Tablet to work?
Agthol 250mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Agthol 250mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Agthol 250mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Agthol 250mg Tablet?
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Agtin Duo Dry Syrup?
Agtin Duo Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Agtin Duo Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Agtin Duo Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Agtin Duo Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Agtin Duo Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Agtin Duo Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Agtin Duo Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Agtin Duo Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup?
Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Agunex CV DS Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can I stop taking AG X Cream when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking AG X Cream and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
How long does AG X Cream takes to work?
Usually, AG X Cream starts working soon after taking it.
=

How long does Agyvit Plus Injection take to work?
It may take 3-4 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Agyvit Plus Injection may take time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Agyvit Plus Injection be more effective?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What should I know about the storage and disposal of Agyvit Plus Injection?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Agziclav Dry Syrup?
Agziclav Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Agziclav Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Agziclav Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Agziclav Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Agziclav Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Agziclav Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Agziclav Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Agziclav Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Is AH1 400mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, AH1 400mg Tablet is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
AH1 400mg Tablet should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is AH1 400mg Tablet used for?
AH1 400mg Tablet is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which AH1 400mg Tablet would not be effective.
How does AH1 400mg Tablet work?
AH1 400mg Tablet works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take AH1 400mg Tablet?
AH1 400mg Tablet should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does AH1 400mg Tablet kill eggs of the worms?
No, AH1 400mg Tablet does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
AH1 400mg Tablet should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
=

Does Ahlmide Eye Drop cause blurred vision?
When you instill the eye drops for the first time, it can make your eyes watery and may sometimes cause blurred vision.
If this happens, it will quickly clear.
Make sure you can see clearly again before you drive, or use tools or machines.
Can I use Ahlmide Eye Drop if I wear contact lenses?
If you usually wear contact lenses, do not wear them while you're using Ahlmide Eye Drop.
You can re-insert the lens 15 minutes after using Ahlmide Eye Drop.
Contact your doctor if there is any eye irritation that persists.
In which conditions the use of Ahlmide Eye Drop should be avoided?
Use of Ahlmide Eye Drop should be avoided in patients who are allergic to it or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using this medicine for the first time, consult your doctor.
Does Ahlmide Eye Drop cause dry mouth?
Dry mouth may occur as a side effect.
Frequent mouth rinses, good oral hygiene, increased water intake, and sugarless candy may help.
What test will be prescribed by the doctor while taking Ahlmide Eye Drop?
While using this medicine, your doctor will prescribe you eye tests frequently to monitor eye pressure.
This is because with Ahlmide Eye Drop there is a risk for an increase in pressure inside the eye which can lead to gradual vision loss.
=

Aicin 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Aicin 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Aicin 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aicin 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Aicin 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Aicin 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Aicin 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Aicin 500mg Tablet to work?
Aicin 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Aicin 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Aicin 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Aicin 500mg Tablet?
=

What is Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet?
Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet?
Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet?
The use of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Aidcillin CV 625 Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What does Aidformin 850 Tablet do exactly?
People with type 2 diabetes are not able to respond normally to the insulin made by their bodies.
When this happens, the concentration of sugar/glucose increases in the blood.
Aidformin 850 Tablet acts in several ways to reduce the increased levels of sugar in blood.
Aidformin 850 Tablet decreases glucose production from the liver and decreases absorption of glucose from the intestine after taking food while improving the sensitivity of the body organs and muscles towards insulin.
This helps improve the uptake of glucose from the blood.
It also helps your body to respond better to the insulin it makes naturally.
Does Aidformin 850 Tablet cause weight loss?
Yes, Aidformin 850 Tablet has been shown to cause weight loss in people who are overweight or obese.
It may also cause a modest loss in weight in those overweight and obese individuals who are at risk for diabetes.
In addition, patients who are sensitive or resistant to insulin may also show weight loss.
But, do not start taking this medicine for weight loss on your own.
Consult your doctor for the same.
What are the benefits of taking Aidformin 850 Tablet?
Aidformin 850 Tablet is one of the first medicines that is given to patients with high blood sugar levels.
It helps control blood sugar levels.
It promotes the body’s response to the insulin made by the pancreas, decreases the amount of sugar made by the liver and decreases the amount of sugar absorbed by the intestines.
Unlike other oral antidiabetic medicines, Aidformin 850 Tablet when taken alone, rarely causes low blood sugar as it prevents the pancreas from secreting more insulin.
In addition to being a great medicine to lower blood sugar levels, it also helps in controlling weight gain.
Can Aidformin 850 Tablet make you sleepy?
Aidformin 850 Tablet usually does not cause sleepiness and is well tolerated.
However, the use of Aidformin 850 Tablet may rarely cause sleep disorders and insomnia.
Sleepiness may be due to a very serious side effect called lactic acidosis, which particularly occurs if your kidneys are not working properly.
Contact your doctor if you feel sleepy or tired while taking Aidformin 850 Tablet.
How to take Aidformin 850 Tablet?
Take Aidformin 850 Tablet with or after a meal.
Do not crush or chew the tablets and swallow it with a glass of water.
If your doctor has prescribed one tablet a day, prefer taking it in the morning with breakfast.
If you have been prescribed two tablets a day, then take one in the morning and other in the evening with dinner.
In case of three doses a day, apart from morning and evening, you can take it with lunch.
Taking Aidformin 850 Tablet with meals will reduce its digestive problems like indigestion, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach ache and loss of appetite.
=

Aidpan-D Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Aidpan-D Tablet?
Aidpan-D Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aidpan-D Tablet?
The use of Aidpan-D Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Aidpan-D Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aidpan-D Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Aidpan-D Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aidpan-D Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aidpan-D Tablet?
=

Should Aidsartan 80 Tablet be taken in the morning or at night?
Aidsartan 80 Tablet is generally recommended to be taken once daily, either in the morning or in the evening.
Consider taking it at the same time each day as it will help you to remember taking it.
How long does it take for Aidsartan 80 Tablet to work?
You may see an improvement within a few days.
But, the maximum benefit can be seen within 4-8 weeks of starting treatment.
My blood pressure is now controlled.
Can I stop taking Aidsartan 80 Tablet now?
No, do not stop taking Aidsartan 80 Tablet without consulting your doctor even if your blood pressure is controlled.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your blood pressure which could be detrimental for you.
Aidsartan 80 Tablet does not cure high blood pressure but controls it.
So, you may have to take the medicine lifelong.
Talk to your doctor if you have any concerns.
If I have some kidney problem, can I take Aidsartan 80 Tablet? Can it further deteriorate my kidney function?
You can take Aidsartan 80 Tablet if it has been advised by your doctor.
Your doctor may ask you to get regular tests done (potassium and creatinine levels) in order to monitor your kidney function.
Aidsartan 80 Tablet may cause worsening of kidney function, therefore you should contact your doctor in case you notice swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands or unexplained weight gain.
I am overweight and the doctor has prescribed me Aidsartan 80 Tablet for blood pressure control.
I am bothered that Aidsartan 80 Tablet can increase my weight.
No, do not worry since Aidsartan 80 Tablet is not known to cause weight gain.
In fact in animal studies Aidsartan 80 Tablet has been found to decrease fat tissue.
=

How quickly does Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet work?
Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet starts working within half an hour to 2 hours.
It dissolves rapidly into the bloodstream and starts showing its effect.
What are the side effects of Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet?
The most common side effects of Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet are constipation, diarrhea, fatigue and headache.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own after some time.
Consult your doctor if these persist or worry you.
When should you take Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet?
Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet should be taken with a full glass of water, with or without food.
It should be used exactly as per the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Usually, the first dose of Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet is taken before the start of your surgery, chemotherapy or radiation treatment.
Is Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet a steroid?
No, Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet is an antiemetic and not a steroid.
Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
It is prescribed for the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting which is commonly observed after surgery or due to cancer chemotherapy.
Does Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet work for seasickness?
No, Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet does not work for seasickness.
This is because Aidsetron MD 4 Tablet has very little effect on the nausea associated with motion sickness.
=

What is Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Nimesulide and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving the pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Can I stop taking Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short-term pain relief and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should also be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with the history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex helps to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Does Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet help in relieving stomach pain?
No, Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Aike NP 100mg/325mg Tablet contains Nimesulide and Paracetamol and both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
=

Aim 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Aim 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Aim 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aim 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Aim 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Aim 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Aim 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Aim 500mg Tablet to work?
Aim 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
=

Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Aimentin 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
=

What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aimfopreg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it at as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aimfopreg Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of nausea or vomiting, which is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aimfopreg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, one of the common side effects of Aimfopreg Tablet is drowsiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol or take any medicines that may depress the central nervous system like cough and cold medicines, certain pain medicines, and medicines that help you sleep, while you are taking Aimfopreg Tablet.
Severe drowsiness can happen or it can become worse and cause falls or accidents.
Can the use of Aimfopreg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aimfopreg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can a pregnant woman take Aimfopreg Tablet?
Yes, it is safe to take Aimfopreg Tablet in pregnant women.
In fact, this medicine is used to treat nausea and vomiting in pregnant women.
It is mainly recommended to those women whose symptoms have not improved after changing their diet or using other non-medicine treatments.
=

Can the use of Aioflox 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aioflox 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aioflox 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aioflox 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Aioflox 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Aioflox 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aioflox 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
The use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Aipanto D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
=

What is Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR?
The use of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Airabzo D 30mg/20mg Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the precautions that I should follow while using Airet HC Cream?
Avoid any contact of Airet HC Cream with mouth, eyes, lips, mucous membranes (such as inside of mouth), and wounded skin.
In case of accidental contact, rinse well with water.
Do not let the medicine accumulate in skin folds.
Airet HC Cream may also cause increased sensitivity to sunlight so avoid or minimize deliberate or prolonged exposure to sunlight or sunlamps.
If sun exposure cannot be avoided, use sunscreen.
I just had a cosmetic treatment.
Can I use Airet HC Cream on that part of the skin?
Don’t use Airet HC Cream on skin that has recently had cosmetic treatment such as depilation, chemical hair treatment, chemical peel, dermabrasion, or laser resurfacing.
You should allow your skin to heal after any treatment before using Airet HC Cream.
However, if not sure, consult your doctor.
I have stopped using Airet HC Cream.
Can I now plan my pregnancy?
Consult your doctor before planning a pregnancy.
Usually, it is advised to wait for about 1 month after stopping Airet HC Cream before you plan your pregnancy.
This is done to avoid any harm to your unborn baby because of the medicine.
Can Airet HC Cream be used in children?
Airet HC Cream gel is used to treat mild to moderate acne in teenagers and adults.
It should not be used in children before puberty or under the age of 12.
What if I use too much Airet HC Cream?
If you use too much Airet HC Cream gel or use it more often than recommended, it may make your skin red or irritated.
If this happens, use the gel less often or stop using it for a few days.
Can I donate blood while using Airet HC Cream?
Do not donate blood while using Airet HC Cream gel and for at least 1 month after stopping it.
If your blood is given to a pregnant woman, it may harm her unborn baby.
How do I use Airet HC Cream on my face?
Always wash and dry your skin, and completely remove any make-up before applying the gel.
Use your fingertips to apply a thin layer of the gel to all areas of skin that have acne and not just each spot.
Try not to use too much, especially where the gel could run into your eyes or build up in folds of skin.
Using more gel will not make your spots clear up more quickly.
Do not use Airet HC Cream gel on irritated areas of skin, for example, cuts, burns, or sunburn as it can make the irritation worse.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet be stored?
Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet make my child sleepy?
Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet?
No, don’t start Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
Can I stop the medicine by myself?
No, all symptoms may reappear on sudden withdrawal of Airkast-L Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet usually if taken for a long-term.
It is advised to stop this medicine gradually under the guidance of your child’s doctor.
=

What is Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Airmont LC 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

For how long should I take Airovas 10 Tablet?
You may need to take Airovas 10 Tablet for life or for as long as directed by your doctor.
The cholesterol levels will be maintained only till you are taking Airovas 10 Tablet.
Stopping Airovas 10 Tablet without starting a different treatment may increase your cholesterol levels again.
This medicine has only a few side effects and is usually considered safe if taken as directed by the doctor.
Does Airovas 10 Tablet cause weight gain?
No, there is no evidence of Airovas 10 Tablet causing weight gain.
If you are taking Airovas 10 Tablet and gaining weight, consult your doctor.
The doctor may get some investigations done to know the reason for the weight gain.
Does Airovas 10 Tablet make you tired?
Yes, Airovas 10 Tablet can make you feel tired.
This is because it reduces the energy supply to the muscles in the body.
However, the exact reason behind the phenomenon is unknown and needs more research.
Generalized fatigue is more often in people with heart disease or those suffering from liver illness.
Airovas 10 Tablet also causes muscle damage which further worsens the tiredness.
Therefore, you must consult your doctor if you feel tired while taking Airovas 10 Tablet.
Should Airovas 10 Tablet be taken at night?
Airovas 10 Tablet should be taken once a day.
It can be taken in the morning or at night or any time of the day, with or without food.
Try taking this medicine at the same time every day.
Doing this will help you remember to take it daily.
What foods should be avoided when taking Airovas 10 Tablet?
Airovas 10 Tablet is used to decrease your blood cholesterol levels.
Therefore, to seek the best results of this medicine, you should avoid foods that are high in calories like fried food and junk food.
It is recommended to eat a low-fat and low-cholesterol diet.
Be sure to follow all the exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietician.
=

Formoterol belongs to a class of medication called long acting beta agonists.
It is not a steroid; however it is available in combination with steroids as an inhaler
How long does it take to work and how long does it stay in the body?
Formoterol works best if taken before exercising or heavy work and another dose should not be taken in the next 12 hours.
It is a long acting drug which is known to be effective for 12 hours in the body
Formoterol belongs to a class of medication called long acting beta agonists.
It helps in relaxing the muscles of the air passages, thus widening it and making it easier to breathe
What form does Formoterol come in?
Formoterol comes as a powder filled capsule for inhaler and a solution for nebulizer use
What is formoterol fumarate/formoterol fumarate dihydrate/formoterol and budesonide/formoterol and advair?
Formoterol fumarate and formoterol fumerate dihydrate are different formulations of formoterol.
Budesonide is a steroid which may be prescribed by the doctor along with formoterol.
Advair is another long acting beta agonist which is the brand name for salmeterol and fluticasone
Formoterol is safe when taken as per the directions of the doctor
=

What is Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet.
Will Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Airtek 5 mg/10 mg Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dosage of Airway-DX Tablet SR be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Airway-DX Tablet SR will not make it more effective.
Further, it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting worse, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Airway-DX Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop Airway-DX Tablet SR when my symptoms are relieved?
No, Airway-DX Tablet SR should be continued as advised by the doctor.
=

What are the storage condition for Aiser DP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Aiser DP Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aiser DP Tablet?
Yes, Aiser DP Tablet is safe for most of the patients, however, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Aiser DP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aiser DP Tablet is usually used for a short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aiser DP Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your physician to do so.
Can the use of Aiser DP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aiser DP Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aiser DP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of $ame can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aiser DP Tablet?
The use of Aiser DP Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Who should not use Aisunate 120mg Injection?
Use of Aisunate 120mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Aisunate 120mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Aisunate 120mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Aisunate 120mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Aisunate 120mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like a kidney- or heart-related problem.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Aisunate 120mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Aisunate 120mg Injection administered?
Aisunate 120mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

What is Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet?
Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Nortriptyline.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain.
Can I stop taking Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet?
Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight..
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
DO not eat foods that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly caused problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss them with your doctor but do not stop taking Aitnaur P 75mg/10mg Tablet.
=

What is Aiwodac 40mg Tablet used for?
Aiwodac 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Aiwodac 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Aiwodac 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Aiwodac 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Aiwodac 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Aiwodac 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Aiwodac 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Aiwodac 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Aiwodac 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Aiwodac 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Aiwodac 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Aiwodac 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Aiwodac 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Aiwodac 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Aiwodac 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
=

What if I give too much Ajicold Syrup by mistake?
Prolonged or excess intake of Ajicold Syrup can put your child at risk of developing serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, /depression, cognition defects and inability to concentrate.
Always stick to the prescribed dose.
To pour out the right dose, use the calibrated cup provided with the medicine by the manufacturer.
Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not give the correct estimate.
How can I store Ajicold Syrup?
Ajicold Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
My child has a cough and fever.
Can I give him two medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by the doctor.
The reason being, both the medicines could have the same ingredients.
This would be equivalent to an overdose and could have serious implications on your child.
Always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines specifically formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before use in your child.
Give the medicine to your child in the prescribed dose specifically.
It is best to take your child to the doctor if the symptoms are bothersome or fail to improve even after treatment.
Can Ajicold Syrup make my child sleepy?
Ajicold Syrup may cause mild drowsiness effect, making your child feel sleepy.
So, be cautious and never give this medicine to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
It’s always best to consult your child’s doctor before giving this medicine to your child.
=

For how long can Ajugram 500 Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Ajugram 500 Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Ajugram 500 Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Ajugram 500 Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Ajugram 500 Injection administered?
Ajugram 500 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Ajugram 500 Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Ajugram 500 Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Ajugram 500 Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ajugram 500 Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

Akair LC Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Akair LC Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Akair LC Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Akair LC Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Akair LC Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Akair LC Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Akair LC Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Akair LC Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Akair LC Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Akair LC Tablet.
Will Akair LC Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Akair LC Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can the use of Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Akceft S 1000mg/500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

I have been prescribed Akcit 500 Tablet for Alzheimer’s disease.
What is its role, and how does it work?
Akcit 500 Tablet is a form of an essential nutrient called choline which is naturally present in the body.
It protects the nerve cells in the brain from damage and also helps to repair the damaged nerve cells.
Therefore, it improves learning, memory, and cognitive function (processing information or perception) in Alzheimer’s disease.
Can I take alcohol during treatment with Akcit 500 Tablet?
There are no studies to determine the effect of alcohol on treatment with Akcit 500 Tablet.
However, since Akcit 500 Tablet is prescribed for stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, head injury, and age-related memory impairment, it is best to avoid the consumption of alcohol.
Can students take Akcit 500 Tablet to improve memory and learning?
No, students should not take Akcit 500 Tablet since studies show that Akcit 500 Tablet is effective only in age-related memory problems, memory problems associated with long-standing stroke, and in Alzheimer’s disease.
Moreover, there is no data available for use of this medicine in children.
What is the role of Akcit 500 Tablet in stroke?
In cases of stroke caused due to blood clots, taking Akcit 500 Tablet orally can help the patient recover completely within 3 months.
=

What is Akeso 90mg/48mg/100mg Tablet used for?
This is a combination of three medicines: Bromelain, Trypsin and Rutoside.
Bromelain and Trypsin are enzymes which increase blood supply in the affected area and help the body produce substances that fight pain and swelling.
Rutoside is an antioxidant which protects the body from any damage caused by chemicals (free radicals) and further reduces swelling.
No, Trypsin is not a hormone.
It is an enzyme, a protein and an endopeptidase.
What is the recommended storage condition for Akeso 90mg/48mg/100mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR?
Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR is a combination of three medicines: Glimepiride, Metformin and Voglibose.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves the blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
Voglibose is an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor which lowers the postprandial (after meals) glucose levels in the body.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of Type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR?
The use of Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), nausea, diarrhea, altered taste, flatulence, stomach pain, headache, skin rash and respiratory tract infection.
Are there any specific conditions in which Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR should not be taken?
The use of Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also avoided in patients with moderate to severe kidney disease and in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, colonic ulcerations and underlying metabolic acidosis including diabetic ketoacidosis.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR?
No, it is not safe to take Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR along with alcohol.
It may lower your low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) and can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
Can the use of Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Akglim MV 1 Tablet SR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always keep glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

For how long can Akik 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Akik 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Akik 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Akik 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Akik 250mg Injection administered?
Akik 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Akik 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Akik 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Akik 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Akik 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Akik 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Akik 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Akik 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Akik 250mg Injection?
=

Akinac-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Akinac-P Tablet?
Akinac-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Akinac-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Akinac-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Akinac-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Akinac-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Akinac-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Akinac-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Akinac-P Tablet?
The use of Akinac-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Akinac-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Akinac-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Akinac-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can the use of Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Akizone S 250mg/125mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

Is Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR?
It is important to know that Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, the use of Akloflam 200mg Tablet SR may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
=

For how long can Akmika 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Akmika 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Akmika 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Akmika 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Akmika 250mg Injection administered?
Akmika 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Akmika 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Akmika 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Akmika 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Akmika 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Akmika 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Is it safe to use Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension?
Yes, Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension is safe to use in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension be stopped when the pain is relieved?
Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, if advised by the doctor, it should be continued for the recommended time period.
Can the use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
In the case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to the doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension?
The use of Akmol Plus DS 100mg/250mg Oral Suspension is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of liver or kidney disease.
=

Before using Akni Gel, clean and dry the affected area.
Gently and thoroughly massage it into the skin.
Be careful not to get the medication in your eyes or mouth.
If Akni Gel gets in your eyes accidentally, wash with plenty of water and call your doctor if your eyes are irritated.
How long should I use Akni Gel?
Use Akni Gel for as long as your doctor tells you.
You may have to use it for several months to clear your acne completely.
Even the initial benefits may take several weeks to appear following which you shall be able to note a gradual but definite improvement.
Usually, Akni Gel should be used for a maximum of 12 weeks.
You may need to use more than one tube of Akni Gel during each course of treatment.
What does Akni Gel do for acne?
Akni Gel treats and prevents acne by stopping the growth of bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes) which causes it.
Acne is an extremely common skin condition.
During adolescence, grease glands in the skin produce extra grease in response to normal amounts of sex hormones in the body which can cause blocked pores (i.e., blackheads).
When this happens, the pores are invaded by bacteria.
As a result, certain chemicals are produced which go into deeper parts of the skin to produce red spots filled with pus, called acne.
Akni Gel is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Akni Gel too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can Akni Gel cause skin rash?
The common side effects of Akni Gel are irritation, swollen, pale red bumps, and dryness.
A scaly skin rash may occur rarely with the use of Akni Gel.
You must consult your doctor if it bothers you.
=

Akomin 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Akomin 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Akomin 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Akomin 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Akomin 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Akomin 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Akomin 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Akomin 500mg Tablet to work?
Akomin 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Akomin 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Akomin 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
=

What if I give too much of Akpod 50mg Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Akpod 50mg Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Akpod 50mg Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Akpod 50mg Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Akpod 50mg Syrup?
Akpod 50mg Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Akpod 50mg Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Akpod 50mg Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Akpod 50mg Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
My child is having a sore throat and ear infection.
More than 80% of sore throats and ear infections are caused by a virus and antibiotics are not given for viral infections.
If your child has a sore throat, runny nose, a barky cough, pain, and discharge from the ear, it is most likely because of a virus.
Consult your child’s doctor to seek guidance.
=

Take AKT-FD Tablet on an empty stomach which means at least one hour before and two hours after a meal and with full glass of water.
Can I drink alcohol while taking AKT-FD Tablet?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking AKT-FD Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the risk of hepatitis caused by AKT-FD Tablet because of isoniazid.
Can the use of AKT-FD Tablet cause discoloration of the urine?
It can cause temporary discoloration of your teeth, sweat, urine, saliva and tears (red, orange or brown color).
This side effect is usually not harmful.
However, discoloration of urine can be a sign of liver damage.
Contact your doctor if you notice discoloration of urine accompanied with stomach pain, loss of appetite and jaundice (yellowing of your skin or eyes).
Can AKT-FD Tablet cause visual impairment?
AKT-FD Tablet contains Ethambutol which may cause visual impairment.
Inform the doctor immediately if you notice any changes in your eyesight.
Can I discontinue AKT-FD Tablet if I feel well?
No, do not discontinue AKT-FD Tablet.
Take the proper course of a drug that has been prescribed for you even if you begin to feel better.
If you stop taking AKT-FD Tablet then your infection may become worse, difficult to treat and it may result in drug-resistant TB (drugs you are taking may no longer work).
=

exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Aktob 80mg Injection administered?
Aktob 80mg Injection should be administered into a vein (intravenously) under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Aktob 80mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Aktob 80mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Aktob 80mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aktob 80mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Aktob 80mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aktob 80mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I don't get better after using Aktob 80mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

How to use Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop?
Wash your hands before applying Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop to avoid contamination, and do not touch the tip of the dropper.
If you wear contact lenses, remove them before using Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop.
For applying Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop, tilt your head back, look up, and pull down the lower eyelid to make a pouch and then put the drops in the pouch.
Can Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop be stopped when symptoms are relieved?
No, Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to the use of Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop cause blurry vision?
Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop can blur your eyes for a short period of time.
Avoid driving or operating machinery just after using Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop?
Akudin T 5mg/1.5mg Eye Drop should not be used by patients who are hypersensitive to Timolol, Brimonidine or any of its constituents.
This medicine should be avoided in patients who have airway disease, lung disease or heart disease.
This medicine should not be used in children who are 2 years old or younger.
=

What is Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection?
Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection?
Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection administered?
Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection?
The use of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Akument CV 1000mg/200mg Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Akupar S 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Akurit LD Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Rifampicin and Isoniazid.
It is used in the treatment of tuberculosis.
Rifampicin works by inactivating a bacterial enzyme (RNA-polymerase) which is required by tuberculosis bacteria to make essential proteins and reproduce.
Isoniazid prevents the tuberculosis causing bacteria from forming their own protective covering.
Together, they kill the bacteria and eradicate the infection.
What is the most important information I should know about the Akurit LD Tablet?
Take the proper course of drug that has been prescribed to you.
Do not stop in between even if you begin to feel better.
Avoid alcohol while taking this medicine as it increases the risk of damage to your liver during treatment.
Tell your doctor immediately if you experience vision changes, loss of appetite, tiredness, stomach pain, nausea or vomiting, yellow skin or eyes or dark-colored urine.
What is the best time to take Akurit LD Tablet?
Take Akurit LD Tablet exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is best to take the medicine on an empty stomach one hour before or two hours after meals.
Does Akurit LD Tablet cause change in urine color/turn urine orange?
Yes, Akurit LD Tablet can change the color of your urine (skin, sweat, saliva, tears and feces) to brownish-red or orange.
Does the use of Akurit LD Tablet make birth control pills ineffective?
Yes, Akurit LD Tablet can make birth control pills less effective.
So, ask the doctor about using a birth control method which does not affect your hormone levels (such as a condom, diaphragm and spermicide).
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Akurit LD Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What organisms does Akuzid 1000 Injection cover?
Akuzid 1000 Injection is active against pseudomonas, anaerobes, and staphylococcus bacteria.
It may not be effective against methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
How is Akuzid 1000 Injection administered?
Akuzid 1000 Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Akuzid 1000 Injection.
Can the use of Akuzid 1000 Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Akuzid 1000 Injection can cause diarrhea.
Akuzid 1000 Injection is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Akuzid 1000 Injection take to work?
Usually, Akuzid 1000 Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Akuzid 1000 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Akuzid 1000 Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Akuzid 1000 Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Is Alan Gel 0.1% Gel safe to be used in pregnancy?
No, Alan Gel 0.1% Gel should not be used during pregnancy.
However, if during the treatment you became pregnant, discontinue the medicine immediately and consult your doctor.
Do not plan a pregnancy while using Alan Gel 0.1% Gel.
Is it safe to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Alan Gel 0.1% Gel?
It is advisable not to undergo cosmetic procedures while using Alan Gel 0.1% Gel.
As cosmetic products with an abrasive, drying, or peeling action may cause an increased irritant effect.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is it normal to have a burning sensation after applying Alan Gel 0.1% Gel?
Yes, it is common to experience burning sensation with the use of Alan Gel 0.1% Gel.
You may also experience redness, drying, and scaling during the first 4 weeks of treatment which usually lessen with continued use of Alan Gel 0.1% Gel.
Inform your doctor if the side effects bother you or do not improve.
How long does it take to see results from Alan Gel 0.1% Gel?
You may start noticing an improvement after two weeks of therapy, but a minimum of eight weeks are required to notice consistent beneficial effects.
How does Alan Gel 0.1% Gel help acne?
Alan Gel 0.1% Gel has anti-inflammatory action which reduces soreness and irritation.
It is used for the treatment of acne of the face, chest, or back and may also help in reducing blackheads, and whiteheads.
It helps in the treatment of abnormal skin processes associated with acne.
Can I use moisturiser after Alan Gel 0.1% Gel?
Moisturizers may be used, if necessary; however, products containing alpha hydroxy or glycolic acids should be avoided.
=

What are the storage condition for Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What is Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Yes, Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients, however, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is usually used for a short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your physician to do so.
Can the use of Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alarflam SP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
=

Can the use of Alarpod CV Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alarpod CV Dry Syrup can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Alarpod CV Dry Syrup takes to work?
Usually, Alarpod CV Dry Syrup starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Alarpod CV Dry Syrup?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Alarpod CV Dry Syrup when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alarpod CV Dry Syrup and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Alarpod CV Dry Syrup?
Alarpod CV Dry Syrup is a combination of two medicines: Cefpodoxime and Clavulanic acid.
This medication is used to treat bacterial infection.
This medication works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infection.
Can the use of Alarpod CV Dry Syrup cause any serious side effects?
Alarpod CV Dry Syrup may cause serious side effects in very few patients (less than 1 in 1,000).
Inform the doctor straight away if you get bloody diarrhea, yellowing of the eyes and skin, bruising or skin discoloration, shortness of breath, widespread rash, skin peeling and fever.
All of these reactions needs urgent medical attention.
=

Cephalexin is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
Can the use of Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT doesn't work?
Talk to your doctor if Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT doesn't seem to work for you.
Your doctor may increase the dose of Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT or switch you to an alternate option, which may work for you.
What if I don't get better after using Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Alaxin 250mg Tablet DT and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

Is Albacot Chewable Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Albacot Chewable Tablet is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
Albacot Chewable Tablet should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is Albacot Chewable Tablet used for?
Albacot Chewable Tablet is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which Albacot Chewable Tablet would not be effective.
How does Albacot Chewable Tablet work?
Albacot Chewable Tablet works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take Albacot Chewable Tablet?
Albacot Chewable Tablet should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does Albacot Chewable Tablet kill eggs of the worms?
No, Albacot Chewable Tablet does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
Albacot Chewable Tablet should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
Albacot Chewable Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Albacot Chewable Tablet effective for treating pinworms?
Yes, Albacot Chewable Tablet an effective medicine which is used for the treatment of pinworms (Enterobius vermicularis).
It shows active action against the larval and the adult stages of the worms.
Consult your doctor before taking any medicines for worm infections.
=

What type of drug is Albadin 5mg Tablet?
Albadin 5mg Tablet is a heart medicine.
It belongs to a class of medicine known as hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channel blockers.
It works by slowing the heart rate.
This helps the heart to pump more blood through the body each time it beats.
Does Albadin 5mg Tablet affect vision?
Albadin 5mg Tablet may cause temporary brightness in the field of vision (luminous visual phenomena).
This usually disappears with continuous use of Albadin 5mg Tablet.
If this happens to you, be careful when driving or using machines at times when there could be sudden changes in light intensity, especially when driving at night.
What are the symptoms of overdosage of Albadin 5mg Tablet?
The symptoms of overdosage of Albadin 5mg Tablet include slow heartbeat, dizziness, excessive tiredness and lack of energy.
If you have taken higher than the recommended dose or experience any of these, consult your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical attention.
What is the most important information that I should know about Albadin 5mg Tablet?
You should remember that Albadin 5mg Tablet may cause serious side effects in adults and children.
Its use in pregnant women can harm the unborn baby.
Some of the other serious side effects may include increased risk of irregular or rapid heartbeat (atrial fibrillation or heart rhythm problems) and slower than normal heart rate (bradycardia).
Does Albadin 5mg Tablet lower blood pressure?
No, Albadin 5mg Tablet commonly causes an increase in blood pressure as a side effect.
This change is temporary and does not affect the treatment with Albadin 5mg Tablet.
However, it should not be given to patients with severely low blood pressure (blood pressure < 90/50 mmHg).
=

Is Albania 400mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Albania 400mg Tablet is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
Albania 400mg Tablet should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is Albania 400mg Tablet used for?
Albania 400mg Tablet is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which Albania 400mg Tablet would not be effective.
How does Albania 400mg Tablet work?
Albania 400mg Tablet works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take Albania 400mg Tablet?
Albania 400mg Tablet should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does Albania 400mg Tablet kill eggs of the worms?
No, Albania 400mg Tablet does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
Albania 400mg Tablet should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
=

Can Albarid IM Oral Suspension be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Albarid IM Oral Suspension should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Albarid IM Oral Suspension, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Albarid IM Oral Suspension early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Albarid IM Oral Suspension cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlbarid IM Oral Suspension can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Albarid IM Oral Suspension be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Albarid IM Oral Suspension?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Albax Suspension is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Albax Suspension?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Albax Suspension.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Albax Suspension to my child?
Albax Suspension can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Albax Suspension?
Albax Suspension should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

Yes, Albee Suspension is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
Albee Suspension should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is Albee Suspension used for?
Albee Suspension is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which Albee Suspension would not be effective.
Albee Suspension works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take Albee Suspension?
Albee Suspension should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does Albee Suspension kill eggs of the worms?
No, Albee Suspension does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
Albee Suspension should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
Albee Suspension is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Albee Suspension effective for treating pinworms?
Yes, Albee Suspension an effective medicine which is used for the treatment of pinworms (Enterobius vermicularis).
It shows active action against the larval and the adult stages of the worms.
Consult your doctor before taking any medicines for worm infections.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Albekon Oral Suspension is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Albekon Oral Suspension?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Albekon Oral Suspension.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Albekon Oral Suspension to my child?
Albekon Oral Suspension can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Albekon Oral Suspension?
Albekon Oral Suspension should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

Can Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlbemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Albemak Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlbenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Albenlica 6mg/400mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Albenya 12mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Albenya 12mg Tablet belongs to a class of medicines known as ectoparasiticides.
It helps to treat many types of parasite infections, including head lice, scabies, river blindness (onchocerciasis), certain types of diarrhea (strongyloidiasis) and some other worm infections.
It can be taken by mouth or applied to the skin for external infestations.
Albenya 12mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
It is important to complete the full course of treatment.
Stopping the use of Albenya 12mg Tablet may cause the symptoms to return or even worsen.
Is Albenya 12mg Tablet available over the counter?
No, Albenya 12mg Tablet is not available over the counter.
It can only be taken if prescribed by a doctor.
Do not self-medicate to avoid any side effects.
Take it only under the supervision of a healthcare professional to get the maximum benefit of Albenya 12mg Tablet.
How does Albenya 12mg Tablet work?
Albenya 12mg Tablet works by first paralyzing and then later killing the infection-causing organisms.
This also helps in slowing down the multiplication rate of the causative organisms, thereby accelerating the healing process.
This whole process helps in treating the infection.
What if I forget to take a dose of Albenya 12mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Albenya 12mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Albenya 12mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

Can Albetis Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Albetis Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Albetis Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Albetis Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Albetis Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlbetis Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Albetis Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Albetis Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Yes, Albezacort Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Albezacort Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Albezacort Tablet used for?
Albezacort Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
Albezacort Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Albezacort Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Albezacort Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Albezacort Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
No, Albezacort Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
=

Can the use of Albiclat 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Albiclat 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Albiclat 500mg Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Albiclat 500mg Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Albiclat 500mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Albiclat 500mg Tablet cause infertility?
=

How long does Albicobal Plus Injection take to work?
It may take 3-4 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Albicobal Plus Injection may take time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Albicobal Plus Injection be more effective?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What should I know about the storage and disposal of Albicobal Plus Injection?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Albid 200mg Syrup is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Albid 200mg Syrup?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Albid 200mg Syrup.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Albid 200mg Syrup to my child?
Albid 200mg Syrup can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Albid 200mg Syrup?
Albid 200mg Syrup should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

What is Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Albiflam MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

Can the use of Albig 400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Albig 400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Albig 400mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Albig 400mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Albig 400mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Albig 400mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Albig 400mg Tablet.
=

How is Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion administered?
Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only.
The dose of the medicine will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion.
What if I vomit after taking Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
What are the serious side effects of taking an excess of the Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion?
Overdose of Albimol IV 1000mg Infusione may cause severe life-threatening liver injury.
Taking more than the prescribed dose may also cause kidney injury, decreased platelet count, and even coma.
Early symptoms of an overdose include nausea, vomiting, and general tiredness.
Immediately consult a doctor or reach an emergency in case of a suspected overdose.
When will I feel better after taking the Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion.
Is Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion an antibiotic?
No, Albimol IV 1000mg Infusion is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
=

Can Albinex-I Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Albinex-I Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Albinex-I Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Albinex-I Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Albinex-I Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlbinex-I Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Albinex-I Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Albinex-I Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Does Albium 10mg Tablet work and what does Albium 10mg Tablet treat?
Albium 10mg Tablet is used for the short-term (2-4 weeks only) treatment of severe anxiety, which may occur alone or in association with sleeping problems (insomnia) or personality/behavioral disorders.
It may also be used to treat muscle spasms, and to relieve alcohol withdrawal symptoms
Albium 10mg Tablet is not recommended for long term use as it may increase the risk of dependence
Is Albium 10mg Tablet stronger than Xanax?
Xanax is a trade name for active drug alprazolam which belongs to the same group of medicines as Albium 10mg Tablet called benzodiazepines.
Albium 10mg Tablet used to treat anxiety disorders, alcohol withdrawal symptoms, or muscle spasms.
Xanax (alprazolam) is used to treat severe anxiety and severe anxiety associated with depression
Can I take ibuprofen with chlordiazepoxide?
Chlordiazepoxide has no known harmful interaction with ibuprofen.
Always consult your physician for the change of dose regimen or an alternative drug of choice that may strictly be required
Does Albium 10mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Albium 10mg Tablet may make you sleepy
Does Albium 10mg Tablet get you high?
Albium 10mg Tablet does have the risk of causing dependence on long term use due to the calming effects, which may be described by some as ‘getting high
=

Can Albocef-CV Tablet be used to treat viral infections?
No, Albocef-CV Tablet is only indicated to treat bacterial infections.
It does not treat viral infections such as common cold, flu.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Albocef-CV Tablet?
The use of Albocef-CV Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any constituents of this medicine.
Inform your doctor about your medical history before taking this medicine to avoid any side effects.
Can the use of Albocef-CV Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Albocef-CV Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Antibiotics can kill good, or helpful bacteria in your stomach and can cause diarrhea.
If you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent diarrhea.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting a doctor.
Can I stop taking Albocef-CV Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Albocef-CV Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Albocef-CV Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Albonex M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What organisms does Albozid 1gm Injection cover?
Albozid 1gm Injection is active against pseudomonas, anaerobes, and staphylococcus bacteria.
It may not be effective against methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
How is Albozid 1gm Injection administered?
Albozid 1gm Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Albozid 1gm Injection.
Can the use of Albozid 1gm Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Albozid 1gm Injection can cause diarrhea.
Albozid 1gm Injection is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Albozid 1gm Injection take to work?
Usually, Albozid 1gm Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Albozid 1gm Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Albozid 1gm Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Albozid 1gm Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Albro Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Albro Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Albro Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Albro Capsule be taken?
Albro Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Albro Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Albro Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Albro Capsule be avoided?
Albro Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Albro Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Albro Capsule.
Is Albro Capsule the same as theophylline?
Albro Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Albro Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What do you need to inform your doctor before you are given Albubet Safe 20% Infusion?
Before you are given this medicine, you need to inform your doctor if you are allergic to albumin preparations or to any of the other ingredients of this medicine.
Suspicion of allergic or anaphylactic type reactions requires an immediate stop of the infusion.
What vitals should be monitored before giving Albubet Safe 20% Infusion
Before giving this injection, your doctor or nurse will measure your blood pressure, heart rate and conduct blood tests to make sure you are not given an excess dose.
If you experience a headache, difficulty in breathing, or increased blood pressure, inform your doctor immediately.
How is Albubet Safe 20% Infusion given?
=

Can Albumide 20mg Tablet cause weight loss?
Yes, Albumide 20mg Tablet may cause weight loss as a common side effect.
However, weight loss due to this medicine is usually insignificant.
The reason for this reduction in weight could be due to accompanying loss of appetite.
Consult your doctor if your weight loss is significant.
When should patients notify their doctor?
The doctor should be informed if one has lung problems like cough, shortness of breath or if one observes symptoms of infection like fever, weakens, and flu-like symptoms.
Along with that, if a person experiences allergic reactions like hives rashes and liver problems like yellowing of skin, loss of appetite then it should be consulted with the doctor.
One should also inform the doctor if there is a decrease in blood cell count causing easy bruising and recurrent infections.
In addition to that, the doctor should be informed if one becomes pregnant during the course of treatment.
Can I plan pregnancy after stopping Albumide 20mg Tablet?
Albumide 20mg Tablet takes fairly long time to get flushed out of your system.
Hence, you should not plan pregnancy for at least 2 years after stopping Albumide 20mg Tablet.
This extensive time duration may be reduced to a few weeks by taking certain medicines which can help speed up the removal of Albumide 20mg Tablet from your body.
How long does it take to see improvement after starting Albumide 20mg Tablet?
Albumide 20mg Tablet may take about 4 weeks or longer to show improvement in the condition.
It may even take 4-6 months to show full benefits.
Hence, the medicine should not be stopped if there is no significant improvement.
For any further query consult your doctor who will analyze the condition.
Can Albumide 20mg Tablet cause cancer?
Albumide 20mg Tablet may increase your chances of cancer especially of lymph system, but this is very rare.
The reason could be decreased strength of the immune system caused by Albumide 20mg Tablet.
Discuss with your doctor if you have concerns regarding it.
=

What do you need to inform your doctor before you are given Alburel 5% Solution for Infusion?
Before you are given this medicine, you need to inform your doctor if you are allergic to albumin preparations or to any of the other ingredients of this medicine.
Suspicion of allergic or anaphylactic type reactions requires an immediate stop of the infusion.
What vitals should be monitored before giving Alburel 5% Solution for Infusion
Before giving this injection, your doctor or nurse will measure your blood pressure, heart rate and conduct blood tests to make sure you are not given an excess dose.
If you experience a headache, difficulty in breathing, or increased blood pressure, inform your doctor immediately.
How is Alburel 5% Solution for Infusion given?
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
It could be worm infection if your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, restless sleep due to anal itching, and persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may suggest collecting your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
What is the best time to give Albuwell Plus Syrup to my child?
Albuwell Plus Syrup can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Areas with poor sanitation may have soil that is contaminated with eggs of worms.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the contaminated soil.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Transmission can also occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
How should I store my child’s medicine?
Store Albuwell Plus Syrup at room temperature in a cool dry place beyond the reach of the children and pets to avoid any accidental intake.
When should I call my child’s doctor right away?
Reach out to the doctor if your child complains of vision problems, puffy eyes, severe itching all over the body or experiences trouble walking or standing, trouble breathing, fast heart rate.
You should also not neglect if your child feels disoriented or confused, exhibits loss of bowel control, or complains of neck pain soon after the intake of Albuwell Plus Syrup.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What if I miss a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember.
But, skip the missed dose if it is time for your next dose.
Can the use of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG cause constipation?
Yes, the use of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits, and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or taking a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about if persistent constipation occurs.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of ALCAINE MPS SUSPENSION 540 MG/50 MG/10 MG?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Alceclos P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
=

Alcef 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Alcef 500mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Alcef 500mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Alcef 500mg Injection?
Alcef 500mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Alcef 500mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Alcef 500mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Alcef 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Alcef 500mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Alcef 500mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
=

What if I overdose my child by mistake?
A single extra dose of ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET is unlikely to do any harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Can ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET cause any serious side effects?
Yes, ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET may rarely cause some serious side effects.
These may include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, severe diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
If your child develops any such unwanted effects, consult your child’s doctor.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET?
ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Can ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET impact my child’s digestion?
ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET is an antibiotic and its use may affect or compromise the good bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract, thereby increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child experiences diarrhea while being on treatment with ALCEPHIN PX 125 MG TABLET, do not abruptly stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
=

Does Alcet 10mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alcet 10mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Alcet 10mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Alcet 10mg Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Alcet 10mg Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alcet 10mg Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alcet 10mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alcet 10mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Alcet 10mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alcet 10mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alcet 10mg Tablet.
Is it safe to take Alcet 10mg Tablet daily for a long time?
Alcet 10mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alcet 10mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

Is Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet to work?
Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alcetriza L 5mg Tablet
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension?
Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension cause diarrhea?
Yes, Alciclav-DS 457mg Oral Suspension may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

How should Alcidic 75mg Injection injection be administered?
Alcidic 75mg Injection injection should only be given by a healthcare professional.
It can be given deep into the muscle (intramuscularly), preferably in buttock, under the skin (subcutaneously), or directly into a vein (intravenously) as a bolus and not as infusion.
The dose should not exceed the prescribed quantity and injection should not be given for more than 2 days.
What is the most important information I need to know about Alcidic 75mg Injection?
It is important to know that Alcidic 75mg Injection may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, taking Alcidic 75mg Injection may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Is Alcidic 75mg Injection a good painkiller?
Alcidic 75mg Injection is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used for various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Can Alcidic 75mg Injection hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Alcidic 75mg Injection may cause renal problems such as protein or blood in urine and painful urination.
Patients who are at maximum risk of developing kidney problems include people who are dehydrated, have heart failure, impaired kidney function, hypertension, elderly, who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Hence, for such patients kidney function monitoring is recommended.
Does Alcidic 75mg Injection make you drowsy?
Alcidic 75mg Injection can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Can Alcidic 75mg Injection be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Alcidic 75mg Injection during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Alcidic 75mg Injection can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Alcidic 75mg Injection during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Alcidic 75mg Injection may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

What is Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alcimo FX 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alcinac Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Alcipro 500mg Tablet is a relatively safe drug.
However, it is not devoid of side effects and hence should only be taken if prescribed by a doctor in the appropriate dose, frequency, and duration as advised.
Can the use of Alcipro 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alcipro 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Alcipro 500mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alcipro 500mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Alcipro 500mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Alcipro 500mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Alcipro 500mg Tablet.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
Can I take Alcipro 500mg Tablet with paracetamol?
Alcipro 500mg Tablet is not known to have any clinically meaningful interaction with paracetamol.
Talk to your doctor before using both the medicines together.
=

Alciz AC Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Caffeine, Paracetamol, Levocetirizine and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold such as body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, runny and stuffy nose.
Are there any foods which I have to avoid while taking Alciz AC Tablet?
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or foods that contain caffeine like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or may have chest discomfort.
Also avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc.) while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Alciz AC Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alciz AC Tablet may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such an episode while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alciz AC Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Alciz AC Tablet?
Serious side effects with Alciz AC Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Alciz AC Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Alciz AC Tablet?
Yes, use of Alciz AC Tablet should be avoided if you have high blood pressure (hypertension), any underlying serious heart condition or cardiovascular disorder, any history of stomach ulcers or overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
However, it can be taken if your doctor is aware of your conditions and advises you to take it.
The use of Alciz AC Tablet should also be avoided if you are taking antidepressant drugs.
These drugs, called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may include phenelzine and isocarboxazid or tricyclic antidepressants like imipramine and amitriptyline.
=

How long does Alclox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Alclox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Alclox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alclox 250 mg/250 mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Why is Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup prescribed?
Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup is prescribed for the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
How should I take Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup?
Take Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
Can I drink water after taking Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup?
Avoid drinking anything immediately after taking Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup as that can reduce the effectiveness of this medicine.
Can the use of Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup contains Sucralfate, which can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation if it persists for a long time.
Can I stop taking Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup when my symptoms are relieved?
No, take Alcocid 1000mg/20mg Syrup for the full prescribed length of time even if you feel better.
Do not stop taking this medication without consulting your doctor.
=

Is it safe to use Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet?
Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to this medication.
Can I stop taking Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet should be continued as advised by your doctor, if you are using the medicine for a condition associated with long-term pain.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet may cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine or a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Alcofen 400mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should be avoided in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active or recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Alcon Brimo Eye Drop a beta blocker?
No, Alcon Brimo Eye Drop is not a beta blocker.
It is an alpha adrenergic agonist which means it acts on alpha adrenergic receptor present in the eye.
This medicine reduces the high pressure in the eye by decreasing the amount of fluid in the eyes.
It has minimal effect on heart and lungs.
Do Alcon Brimo Eye Drop make you sleepy?
Yes, Alcon Brimo Eye Drop may cause drowsiness and may also cause fatigue which may impair the ability to drive or use machinery.
It may also cause blurred or abnormal vision which could cause difficulty in driving or using machinery, especially at night or in reduced lighting.
You should avoid driving or using machinery until these symptoms have subsided.
Does Alcon Brimo Eye Drop lower blood pressure?
Alcon Brimo Eye Drop may cause low or high blood pressure.
Before taking Alcon Brimo Eye Drop, inform your doctor if you are already taking any medicines to lower blood pressure.
Moreover, keep a regular check on your blood pressure while you are taking Alcon Brimo Eye Drop.
Does Alcon Brimo Eye Drop cause pupil dilation?
No, Alcon Brimo Eye Drop does not cause pupil dilation.
On the contrary, in very rare cases, it may cause pupil constriction, also called miosis.
If you experience miosis, you may have night vision difficulty, halos and glare.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Alcostar P Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Alcostar P Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Alcostar P Oral Suspension be stored?
Alcostar P Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Alcostar P Oral Suspension?
Alcostar P Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Alcostar P Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Alcostar P Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

What is Alcoxib 90mg Tablet used for?
Alcoxib 90mg Tablet is used to reduce the pain and swelling (inflammation) in the joints and muscles of people 16 years of age and older with rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and gout.
Alcoxib 90mg Tablet is also used for the short term treatment of moderate pain after dental surgery in people 16 years of age and older.
Is it safe to use Alcoxib 90mg Tablet?
Alcoxib 90mg Tablet is safe for most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, fatigue, diarrhea, etc.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to this medication.
Can I stop taking Alcoxib 90mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alcoxib 90mg Tablet should be continued as advised by your doctor, if you are using the medicine for a condition associated with long-term pain.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet may cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine or a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet?
The use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should be avoided in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active or recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Is Alcoxib 90mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Alcoxib 90mg Tablet should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Alcoxib 90mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect the kidneys from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, leading to kidney damage because of long-term use.
Therefore, the use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Alcuf-DX Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alcuf-DX Syrup may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alcuf-DX Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alcuf-DX Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Alcuf-DX Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alcuf-DX Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is it better to take AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule at night or in the morning?
You can take AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule at any time of the day, morning, or night.
However, there is limited information available about the best time to take AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule.
Take it exactly as advised by your doctor.
What are the benefits of taking AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule?
AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule is important for maintaining bone health, support the health of the immune system, brain, and nervous system.
It also regulates insulin levels and is also important for a healthy heart and blood vessels.
How should AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule be taken?
AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule should be swallowed whole with water and should not be crushed or chewed.
It is advised to take it with the main meal of the day to increase its absorption.
Who should not take AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule?
AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule should not be taken by patients who are allergic to cholecalciferol, patients with increased levels of calcium in the blood or if there is presence of calcium in the urine.
Its use should be avoided by patients who have kidney stones or have severe kidney problems.
What happens if I take too much AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule?
Taking too much AL-D3 Soft Gelatin Capsule for a long period of time may increase the levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia).
This may cause weakness, fatigue, vomiting, diarrhea, sluggishness, kidney stones, increased blood pressure, and growth retardation in children.
=

Can the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet cause gout?
Yes, Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet can cause gout.
Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet contains torasemide which can increase the blood uric acid levels by increasing its absorption from the kidneys.
Increased uric acid levels can cause a gout attack.
Inform your doctor if you have hyperuricemia (excess of uric acid in blood) or a history of gout before taking this medicine.
Use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet should be avoided in patients with gout.
Can the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet cause dehydration (excessive loss of fluid)?
Yes, the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet can cause dehydration (excessive loss of fluid).
The patient may experience dryness of the mouth, thirst, drowsiness, restlessness, muscle pain, weakness, tiredness, fall in blood pressure (hypotension), decreased urination (oliguria), increased heart rate (tachycardia), nausea and vomiting.
Inform your doctor if you experience persistent problems while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet cause hyperkalemia (increased potassium levels)?
Yes, Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet can cause hyperkalemia (increased potassium levels).
This occurs more commonly in patients with underlying kidney disease or in patients taking excessive potassium in their diet.
High potassium levels can cause fatal heart problems.
It is very important to get electrolytes and kidney function tests done on a regular basis while you are taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications to the use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet?
The use of Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet should be avoided in patients with hypersensitivity to torasemide, sulfonylureas or spironolactone or any other ingredient of the product.
The use of this medicine should also be avoided in patients with anuria, acute renal insufficiency, hepatic coma and pre-coma, low blood pressure (hypotension), cardiac arrhythmias, patients taking aminoglycosides or cephalosporins, kidney dysfunction due to drugs which cause renal damage, patients with high potassium levels (hyperkalemia), Addison's disease and in children with moderate to severe renal impairment.
What is the storage condition for the Aldactone Plus 25mg/20mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What are the storage condition for Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What is Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet?
Yes, Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients, however, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet is usually used for a short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your physician to do so.
Can the use of Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aldase DP 50mg/325mg/10mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet.
This medicine contains Cetirizine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Do not drive car, operate machinery, work at heights or participate in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Will Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Can the use of Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alday AM 5 mg/60 mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
=

Is Aldecef 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Aldecef 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Aldecef 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aldecef 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Aldecef 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Aldecef 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Aldecef 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Aldecef 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Aldecef 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Aldecef 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aldecef 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Aldecef 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Aldecef 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Aldecef 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Aldecef 200mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Aldecef 200mg Tablet may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Aldecef 200mg Tablet.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Aldep 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Aldep 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Aldep 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Aldep 10mg Tablet?
Aldep 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Aldep 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Aldep 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Aldep 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Aldep 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Aldep 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Aldep 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Aldep 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

What is Alde Plus CX Tablet?
Alde Plus CX Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Chlorzoxazone.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
Chlorzoxazone is a muscle relaxant which works by acting on the central nervous system.
Diclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the chemical substance (prostaglandins) in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alde Plus CX Tablet?
Alde Plus CX Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, stomach pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Alde Plus CX Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alde Plus CX Tablet should be continued if advised for a specific time duration by your doctor.
However, it can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alde Plus CX Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alde Plus CX Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alde Plus CX Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alde Plus CX Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Alde Plus CX Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Alde Plus CX Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alde Plus CX Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Alde Plus CX Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule good for skin?
Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule is very good for the skin.
It protects against harmful ultraviolet rays, prevents any sunburns or tanning, nourishes skin with essential antioxidants and combats ageing.
Its antioxidant effects destroy any harmful toxins, moisturise your skin and make your skin smooth and healthy.
It will also prevent fine lines, wrinkles and other signs of ageing.
This improves your appearance and boosts your self-confidence too.
What foods contain vitamin E naturally?
There are many food items that contain vitamin E naturally.
They are vegetable oils (such as wheat germ, sunflower, safflower, corn, and soybean oils), nuts (such as almonds, peanuts, walnut, and hazelnut), green leafy vegetables (such as spinach and broccoli), cereals, fruit juices etc.
Taking such foods in your daily diet will help you get more vitamin E and improve your overall health.
Does Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule improve immunity?
Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule helps improve immunity.
It strengthens your immune system, and increases your ability to fight infections.
The antioxidants that are present in Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule, prevent any harmful toxins from damaging the various organs in our body.
Can I take Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule in pregnancy?
There is no clarity on the use of Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule in pregnancy.
However, if you are pregnant or planning to conceive, consult your doctor before taking Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule.
You may take it only if prescribed by your doctor.
Is it safe to take Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule daily?
Alder Vit-e 400 Soft Gelatin Capsule is safe to be taken daily.
However, it should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Aldezole 200mg Suspension is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aldezole 200mg Suspension?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Aldezole 200mg Suspension.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Aldezole 200mg Suspension to my child?
Aldezole 200mg Suspension can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Aldezole 200mg Suspension?
Aldezole 200mg Suspension should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

Can I give Aldico 125mg Tablet DT to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Aldico 125mg Tablet DT for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Aldico 125mg Tablet DT to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Aldico 125mg Tablet DT can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aldico 125mg Tablet DT?
Although rare, Aldico 125mg Tablet DT may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aldico 125mg Tablet DT?
Aldico 125mg Tablet DT can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aldico 125mg Tablet DT.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aldico 125mg Tablet DT?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
Is Aldico 125mg Tablet DT safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, do not give this medicine to your child in this case as a high percentage of children with infectious mononucleosis develop a skin rash (erythematous rash) while taking Aldico 125mg Tablet DT.
=

Aldicure-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aldicure-P Tablet?
Aldicure-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aldicure-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aldicure-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aldicure-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aldicure-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aldicure-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aldicure-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aldicure-P Tablet?
The use of Aldicure-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aldicure-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aldicure-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aldicure-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can the use of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aldigesic Spas 80mg/100mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Aldip 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Aldip 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Aldip 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Aldip 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Aldip 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Aldip 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Aldip 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Aldip 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Aldip 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Aldip 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

How long does it take for Aldoloose 10mg Syrup to work?
It takes about 2-3 days to see the benefits of the treatment.
Talk to your doctor if you feel constipated even after 3 days of taking Aldoloose 10mg Syrup.
What is Aldoloose 10mg Syrup used for?
Aldoloose 10mg Syrup is used to treat constipation which is presented as infrequent bowel movements, hard and dry stools.
It is also used in patients with hepatic encephalopathy which is a serious liver problem causing confusion, tremors and decreased level of consciousness.
Is Aldoloose 10mg Syrup a laxative?
Yes, Aldoloose 10mg Syrup is a laxative which softens the stools by pulling in water from the body to the large intestine.
It is also used to reduce the amount of ammonia in the blood of patients with liver disease.
What are the side effects of taking Aldoloose 10mg Syrup?
Aldoloose 10mg Syrup very commonly causes diarrhea, flatulence, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain.
Diarrhea and abdominal pain occur due to a high dose.
In such cases, the dose should be reduced.
Flatulence may occur during the first few days of treatment and may disappear after sometime.
This medicine may also cause electrolyte imbalance.
However, this is an uncommon side effect.
Is it okay to take Aldoloose 10mg Syrup every day?
You should take Aldoloose 10mg Syrup for as long as advised by your doctor.
You may also take it for as long as constipation lasts, which may be up to a week.
For hepatic encephalopathy, the treatment may be longer, even several months.
=

Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aldomox 250mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How to take Aldrofos 70mg Tablet?
It should be taken in the morning after getting up on an empty stomach with a full glass of water.
Do not lie down and stay fully upright for at least 30 minutes after swallowing the medicine.
Avoid taking any food or medication for the next 30 mins after taking this medicine.
Take this medicine only after consulting the doctor and follow the instructions advised.
Why can you not lie down after taking Aldrofos 70mg Tablet?
No, one should not lie down after taking Aldrofos 70mg Tablet.
This is because there is a possibility that the medication might come back up into the esophagus (food pipe) and even damage the esophagus.
Staying upright will help the medicine to settle down quickly in your stomach and prevent side effects like heartburn and pain.
Does Aldrofos 70mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Aldrofos 70mg Tablet can cause hair loss, but this is not a common side effect.
If you experience hair loss while taking this medication immediately report to your doctor and follow the advice given.
Can Aldrofos 70mg Tablet be used in pregnant women?
Aldrofos 70mg Tablet should be avoided during pregnancy.
Enough data is not available regarding the use of Aldrofos 70mg Tablet in pregnant women.
You should consult your doctor if you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant before taking this medication.
Does Aldrofos 70mg Tablet cause cancer/ hair loss/ tiredness/ increase in blood pressure?
Aldrofos 70mg Tablet has a side effect of causing hair loss and tiredness.
However, it is not known to cause cancer or increase in blood pressure.
Consult your doctor if you experience such side effects.
=

What is Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR and what is it used for?
Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR belongs to the group of medicines called vasodilators and uterine relaxants.
It is used in the treatment of premature labor, a condition when the uterus starts contracting too early than usual.
It may also be used in the treatment of peripheral vascular diseases.
How and in what dose should I take Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR?
Take this medicine, as per the advice of your doctor.
The dose and duration depend on your exact medical condition.
However take it at the same time of each day, to help you remember it.
What precautions do I need to take while taking Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR?
You should consult your doctor, immediately if your contractions begin again or your water breaks.
 What are the possible side effects of using Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR?
The common side effects of Aldulan 40mg Tablet SR are trembling, nervousness, weakness, dizziness, flushing, tachycardia, chest pain, nausea, and vomiting.
=

For how long can Alecin 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Alecin 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Alecin 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Alecin 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Alecin 500mg Injection administered?
Alecin 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Alecin 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Alecin 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Alecin 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alecin 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

Is Aleczine 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Aleczine 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Aleczine 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Aleczine 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Aleczine 5mg Tablet to work?
Aleczine 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Aleczine 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Aleczine 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Aleczine 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Aleczine 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Aleczine 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Aleczine 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Aleczine 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Aleczine 5mg Tablet
=

What is Aleez 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Aleez 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Aleez 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Aleez 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Aleez 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Aleez 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Aleez 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Aleez 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Aleez 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Aleez 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

Does Alego L Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alego L Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Alego L Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Alego L Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Alego L Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alego L Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alego L Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alego L Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Alego L Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alego L Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alego L Tablet.
Is it safe to take Alego L Tablet daily for a long time?
Alego L Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alego L Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

What is Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Alemox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What if I give too much of Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Alencef 50mg Dry Syrup lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
=

How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Alencit Plus 500mg/800mg Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Alencit Plus 500mg/800mg Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain rather than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alencit Plus 500mg/800mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How to take Alendros 70mg Tablet?
It should be taken in the morning after getting up on an empty stomach with a full glass of water.
Do not lie down and stay fully upright for at least 30 minutes after swallowing the medicine.
Avoid taking any food or medication for the next 30 mins after taking this medicine.
Take this medicine only after consulting the doctor and follow the instructions advised.
Why can you not lie down after taking Alendros 70mg Tablet?
No, one should not lie down after taking Alendros 70mg Tablet.
This is because there is a possibility that the medication might come back up into the esophagus (food pipe) and even damage the esophagus.
Staying upright will help the medicine to settle down quickly in your stomach and prevent side effects like heartburn and pain.
Does Alendros 70mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Alendros 70mg Tablet can cause hair loss, but this is not a common side effect.
If you experience hair loss while taking this medication immediately report to your doctor and follow the advice given.
Can Alendros 70mg Tablet be used in pregnant women?
Alendros 70mg Tablet should be avoided during pregnancy.
Enough data is not available regarding the use of Alendros 70mg Tablet in pregnant women.
You should consult your doctor if you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant before taking this medication.
Does Alendros 70mg Tablet cause cancer/ hair loss/ tiredness/ increase in blood pressure?
Alendros 70mg Tablet has a side effect of causing hair loss and tiredness.
However, it is not known to cause cancer or increase in blood pressure.
Consult your doctor if you experience such side effects.
=

What is Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to notice the initial benefits of pain relief after taking Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect due to overdosage.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will Alenmol MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher than recommended doses?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How to take Alenost 70mg Tablet?
It should be taken in the morning after getting up on an empty stomach with a full glass of water.
Do not lie down and stay fully upright for at least 30 minutes after swallowing the medicine.
Avoid taking any food or medication for the next 30 mins after taking this medicine.
Take this medicine only after consulting the doctor and follow the instructions advised.
Why can you not lie down after taking Alenost 70mg Tablet?
No, one should not lie down after taking Alenost 70mg Tablet.
This is because there is a possibility that the medication might come back up into the esophagus (food pipe) and even damage the esophagus.
Staying upright will help the medicine to settle down quickly in your stomach and prevent side effects like heartburn and pain.
Does Alenost 70mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Alenost 70mg Tablet can cause hair loss, but this is not a common side effect.
If you experience hair loss while taking this medication immediately report to your doctor and follow the advice given.
Can Alenost 70mg Tablet be used in pregnant women?
Alenost 70mg Tablet should be avoided during pregnancy.
Enough data is not available regarding the use of Alenost 70mg Tablet in pregnant women.
You should consult your doctor if you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant before taking this medication.
Does Alenost 70mg Tablet cause cancer/ hair loss/ tiredness/ increase in blood pressure?
Alenost 70mg Tablet has a side effect of causing hair loss and tiredness.
However, it is not known to cause cancer or increase in blood pressure.
Consult your doctor if you experience such side effects.
=

Aleo 500mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aleo 500mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aleo 500mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Aleo 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aleo 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aleo 500mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aleo 500mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Aleo 500mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Aleo 500mg Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Aleo 500mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, the use of Aleo 500mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle.
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aleo 500mg Tablet but it may be more significant in people above 60 years of age.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
=

What if I give too much of Alepod CV Dry Syrup by mistake?
Alepod CV Dry Syrup is safe and usually an extra dose of it would not do any harm.
But since overdose increases the risk of side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition, you must speak to a doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of Alepod CV Dry Syrup to your child.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Alepod CV Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alepod CV Dry Syrup?
Alepod CV Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alepod CV Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alepod CV Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alepod CV Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may keep a check on your child’s condition by prescribing kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically.
Can Alepod CV Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Alepod CV Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad ones too, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child develops diarrhea while on Alepod CV Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
=

Is Alerbit 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alerbit 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alerbit 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alerbit 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alerbit 5mg Tablet to work?
Alerbit 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alerbit 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alerbit 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alerbit 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alerbit 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alerbit 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alerbit 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alerbit 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alerbit 5mg Tablet
=

What is Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Will Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Alercid M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Is Alerdain 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alerdain 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alerdain 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alerdain 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alerdain 5mg Tablet to work?
Alerdain 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alerdain 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alerdain 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alerdain 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alerdain 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alerdain 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alerdain 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alerdain 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alerdain 5mg Tablet
=

Is Alerfix Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alerfix Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alerfix Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alerfix Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alerfix Tablet to work?
Alerfix Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alerfix Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alerfix Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alerfix Tablet for a long time?
Alerfix Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alerfix Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alerfix Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alerfix Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alerfix Tablet
=

What if I give too much Alerfri P Syrup by mistake?
Prolonged or excess intake of Alerfri P Syrup can put your child at risk of developing serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, /depression, cognition defects and inability to concentrate.
Always stick to the prescribed dose.
To pour out the right dose, use the calibrated cup provided with the medicine by the manufacturer.
Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not give the correct estimate.
How can I store Alerfri P Syrup?
Alerfri P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
My child has a cough and fever.
Can I give him two medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by the doctor.
The reason being, both the medicines could have the same ingredients.
This would be equivalent to an overdose and could have serious implications on your child.
Always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines specifically formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before use in your child.
Give the medicine to your child in the prescribed dose specifically.
It is best to take your child to the doctor if the symptoms are bothersome or fail to improve even after treatment.
Can Alerfri P Syrup make my child sleepy?
Alerfri P Syrup may cause mild drowsiness effect, making your child feel sleepy.
So, be cautious and never give this medicine to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
It’s always best to consult your child’s doctor before giving this medicine to your child.
=

Does Alergin 10mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alergin 10mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Alergin 10mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Alergin 10mg Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Alergin 10mg Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alergin 10mg Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alergin 10mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alergin 10mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Alergin 10mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alergin 10mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alergin 10mg Tablet.
Is it safe to take Alergin 10mg Tablet daily for a long time?
Alergin 10mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alergin 10mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

What is Alergo 120mg Tablet used for?
Alergo 120mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Alergo 120mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Alergo 120mg Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alergo 120mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alergo 120mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Alergo 120mg Tablet?
Alergo 120mg Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Alergo 120mg Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Alergo 120mg Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

Is Alerid Syrup a steroid? What is it used for?
Alerid Syrup is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
My child is restless and unable to sleep properly at night.
No, although this medicine causes drowsiness as a side effect, it should not be given to induce sleep in children.
Consult your child’s doctor if your child has trouble sleeping as it could be due to some other underlying condition.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alerid Syrup?
Alerid Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alerid Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
How much Alerid Syrup should I give to my child?
Alerid Syrup should be given strictly as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your child’s body weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your child’s condition.
What if I give too much of Alerid Syrup by mistake?
Although Alerid Syrup is relatively safe to use in children yet an excessive amount may cause some serious side effects such as seizures, hallucinations, rapid heart rate, irritability, slow breathing, and coma.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet be stored?
Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet make my child sleepy?
Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet?
No, don’t start Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
Can I stop the medicine by myself?
No, all symptoms may reappear on sudden withdrawal of Alerlife-M Kid 2.5mg/4mg Tablet usually if taken for a long-term.
It is advised to stop this medicine gradually under the guidance of your child’s doctor.
=

Is Alernit 5mg Syrup a steroid? What is it used for?
Alernit 5mg Syrup is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
My child is restless and unable to sleep properly at night.
Can I give Alernit 5mg Syrup?
No, although this medicine causes drowsiness as a side effect, it should not be given to induce sleep in children.
Consult your child’s doctor if your child has trouble sleeping as it could be due to some other underlying condition.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alernit 5mg Syrup?
Alernit 5mg Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alernit 5mg Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
How much Alernit 5mg Syrup should I give to my child?
Alernit 5mg Syrup should be given strictly as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your child’s body weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your child’s condition.
What if I give too much of Alernit 5mg Syrup by mistake?
Although Alernit 5mg Syrup is relatively safe to use in children yet an excessive amount may cause some serious side effects such as seizures, hallucinations, rapid heart rate, irritability, slow breathing, and coma.
How should Alernit 5mg Syrup be stored?
Store Alernit 5mg Syrup at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
When do I need to call my child’s doctor right away?
Always consult your child’s doctor at every step in case of any confusion.
However, immediate assistance may be required if your child develops serious side effects.
These may include allergic reactions (such as facial swelling, trouble breathing), signs of liver problem (such as dark-colored urine, yellow eyes or skin), excessive sleepiness, rapid heartbeat, hallucinations, feeling confused or hyperactive, trouble passing urine, irritability, and vision changes.
=

Does Alerout 10mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alerout 10mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Alerout 10mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Alerout 10mg Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Alerout 10mg Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alerout 10mg Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alerout 10mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alerout 10mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Alerout 10mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alerout 10mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alerout 10mg Tablet.
Is it safe to take Alerout 10mg Tablet daily for a long time?
Alerout 10mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alerout 10mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

What is Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alersid M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Alertac-A Tablet?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alertac-A Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Alertac-A Tablet.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alertac-A Tablet?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alertac-A Tablet.
This medicine contains Cetirizine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Alertac-A Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alertac-A Tablet may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Do not drive car, operate machinery, work at heights or participate in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Will Alertac-A Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Can the use of Alertac-A Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alertac-A Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
=

Is Alertriz 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alertriz 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alertriz 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alertriz 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alertriz 5mg Tablet to work?
Alertriz 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alertriz 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alertriz 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alertriz 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alertriz 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alertriz 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alertriz 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alertriz 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alertriz 5mg Tablet
=

What is Alerza 180mg Tablet used for?
Alerza 180mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alerza 180mg Tablet?
Alerza 180mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alerza 180mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I take Alerza 180mg Tablet along with juices?
Avoid taking Alerza 180mg Tablet with fatty meals and fruit juices as both can reduce the absorption of the medicine from the gut.
If you need to take it, ensure a gap of at least 4 hours to decrease any possible medicine-food interaction.
How much Alerza 180mg Tablet should I take?
Alerza 180mg Tablet should be taken strictly as prescribed by your doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your body's weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your condition.
How should Alerza 180mg Tablet be stored?
Keep Alerza 180mg Tablet at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Always keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Who should not take Alerza 180mg Tablet?
Alerza 180mg Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergies to any ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue
=

What is Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Aleveo P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What if I don't get better after using Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alevo CP 200 mg/250 mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
=

What is Alex Cold Syrup Berry?
Alex Cold Syrup Berry is a combination of two medicines that help to relieve the symptoms of cold.
It consists of Chlorpheniramine, an antiallergic that relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing.
It also consists of Phenylephrine, a decongestant that narrows the small blood vessels providing relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Alex Cold Syrup Berry?
Alex Cold Syrup Berry is safe for most of the patients when taken according to the dose and duration recommended by the doctor.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, headache, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can the use of Alex Cold Syrup Berry cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alex Cold Syrup Berry can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Alex Cold Syrup Berry cause sleepiness or dizziness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Alex Cold Syrup Berry is drowsiness.
Avoid driving, operating heavy machinery or engaging in other activities that need your full attention, unless your healthcare provider has permitted you to do so.
Do not drink alcohol or other cough and cold medicines.
Also, avoid taking medicines that help you sleep while taking Alex Cold Syrup Berry as it may lead to excessive drowsiness.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alex Cold Syrup Berry can lead to increased side effects due to overdose.
Do not start, stop or change the dosage of your medicine before consulting your doctor.
=

How long does Alexi-DX 250mg/250mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Alexi-DX 250mg/250mg Injection starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Alexi-DX 250mg/250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alexi-DX 250mg/250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Alexo 120mg Tablet used for?
Alexo 120mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Alexo 120mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Alexo 120mg Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alexo 120mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alexo 120mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Alexo 120mg Tablet?
Alexo 120mg Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Alexo 120mg Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Alexo 120mg Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is Alexo 120mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Alexo 120mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It is an anti-allergy medicine and helps to treat allergic conditions such as sneezing, stuffy or runny nose, hives, etc.
On the other hand, antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
Can Alexo 120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, Alexo 120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

Alezith 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Alezith 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Alezith 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alezith 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Alezith 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Alezith 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Alezith 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Alezith 500mg Tablet to work?
Alezith 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Alezith 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Alezith 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Alezith 500mg Tablet?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Alezith 500mg Tablet should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Alezith 500mg Tablet.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Alezith 500mg Tablet increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Alezith 500mg Tablet a strong antibiotic?
Alezith 500mg Tablet is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Alezith 500mg Tablet has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
Can you get a yeast infection from taking Alezith 500mg Tablet?
Some people may get a fungal or yeast infection known as thrush after taking Alezith 500mg Tablet.
Antibiotics such as Alezith 500mg Tablet can kill the normal or ‘good bacteria’ of your intestine responsible for preventing thrush.
You should inform your doctor if you get a sore or vaginal itching or discharge.
Also, inform your doctor if you get a white patch in the mouth or tongue after taking Alezith 500mg Tablet or soon after stopping it.
=

Does ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET cause weight loss?
There is evidence that normal doses of ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET do not cause significant weight loss.
However, very high doses of this medicine can affect the absorption of food, thereby causing weight loss.
Do not take this medication for weight loss as it is not approved for the treatment of obesity.
Do consult your doctor before starting this medication.
How should you take ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET?
ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET is usually prescribed to be taken orally three times daily immediately before each meal.
ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET may be given along with a controlled diet.
However, in case ALFABOSE 0.3 MG TABLET does not work alone, it may be given along with a proper diet and other antidiabetic medicines.
Your doctor may further increase your doses if the given doses do not provide sufficient control over the blood sugar levels.
=

For how long can Alfakim 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Alfakim 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Alfakim 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Alfakim 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Alfakim 100mg Injection administered?
Alfakim 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Alfakim 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Alfakim 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Alfakim 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alfakim 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Alfakim 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Alfamec PB Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Alfamec PB Capsule when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Alfamec PB Capsule even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Alfamec PB Capsule, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Alfamec PB Capsule before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Alfamec PB Capsule?
Alfamec PB Capsule can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Alfamec PB Capsule cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alfamec PB Capsule may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Alfamec PB Capsule?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Alfamec PB Capsule are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Alfamec PB Capsule and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
How long will the Alfamec PB Capsule take to act?
An initial benefit with Alfamec PB Capsule may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months or more (in some patients) to see the full benefits.
=

Can the use of Alfastat-F Tablet cause liver damage?
Alfastat-F Tablet contains Rosuvastatin and Fenofibrate.
A very rare (1 in 10000 patient) side effect of this medicine is liver damage.
Use of this medicine should be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes, or abnormal liver enzymes.
Can the use of Alfastat-F Tablet cause muscle pain?
Yes, Alfastat-F Tablet may cause muscle pain due to muscle injury.
However, this side effect does not occur in everybody.
Talk to your doctor as soon as possible if you are experiencing symptoms such as muscle pain or weakness.
What lifestyle changes should I adopt while taking Alfastat-F Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Alfastat-F Tablet.
Stop smoking, as smoking lowers your risk of having a heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and decrease your risk of heart attack.
What medicines should I avoid while taking Alfastat-F Tablet?
Alfastat-F Tablet can interact with several medicines and can cause serious problems.
Talk to your doctor and inform him about using Alfastat-F Tablet before taking any prescription or non-prescription medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alfastat-F Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Alfenac-P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Alfex 60mg Tablet used for?
Alfex 60mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Alfex 60mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Alfex 60mg Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alfex 60mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alfex 60mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Alfex 60mg Tablet?
Alfex 60mg Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Alfex 60mg Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Alfex 60mg Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is Alfex 60mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Alfex 60mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It is an anti-allergy medicine and helps to treat allergic conditions such as sneezing, stuffy or runny nose, hives, etc.
On the other hand, antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
Can Alfex 60mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, Alfex 60mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

How long should I take Alfi 100mg Tablet?
Alfi 100mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Alfi 100mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Alfi 100mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alfi 100mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Alfi 100mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Alfi 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alfi 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alfi 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alfi 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Alfi 100mg Tablet safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Alfi 100mg Tablet is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
How long should I take Alfi 100mg Tablet?
Alfi 100mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Can Alfine 250 Tablet be safe for use in patients with liver cirrhosis?
Oral intake of Alfine 250 Tablet is not recommended in patients with chronic or active liver disease.
Your doctor may prescribe a liver function test to check whether the liver is functioning effectively or not.
This is done because the medicine gets metabolized by liver enzymes and any inefficiency in liver function can lead to increased levels of the medication in the blood, resulting in increased side effects and toxicity.
Therefore, it is important to inform your doctor if you have any liver disease or cirrhosis.
Also, inform your doctor about the medicines you may be taking as taking Alfine 250 Tablet with another medicine can lead to liver toxicity and Alfine 250 Tablet by acting on the liver enzymes can change the levels of other drugs.
Your doctor may suggest periodic monitoring (after 4-6 weeks of treatment) of liver function test and make dose adjustments accordingly.
Does Alfine 250 Tablet cause any skin reactions?
Yes, sensitive individuals may develop skin reactions while using Alfine 250 Tablet.
There are rare reports of people developing serious skin/hypersensitivity reactions like Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and other severe skin reactions with Alfine 250 Tablet.
Therefore, do not take this medication without consulting your physician.
And, in case you encounter any type of skin reaction or rashes, stop the medication immediately and report to the doctor.
Alfine 250 Tablet is effective as an anti fungal medicine if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop taking this medicine too early, the fungus may continue to grow and the infection may return or worsen.
How long do I need to take Alfine 250 Tablet?
The usual duration of treatment for Tinea pedis (fungal infection in the foot), Tinea corporis (ringworms), and Tinea cruris (fungal infection in the groin) is about 2 to 4 weeks.
The duration may sometimes be extended to 6 weeks.
For fungal infections of nails, the duration of treatment usually varies from 6 to 12 weeks.
For fingernail fungal infections it may take 6 weeks whereas toenail fungal infection may take about 12 weeks.
However, the exact duration of the therapy is decided by the doctor depending upon the type of infection, the site of infection, and the patient’s response to the therapy.
Can I drink tea or coffee while taking Alfine 250 Tablet?
Caffeinated drinks like tea and coffee should be taken with caution while being on treatment with Alfine 250 Tablet.
Alfine 250 Tablet decreases the rate of metabolism of caffeine by 19% which is an important constituent of coffee, thereby increasing the levels of caffeine in the blood.
These increased levels of caffeine may lead to side effects such as jitteriness, headache, increased heartbeat, and restlessness.
=

Is Alflaz 30mg Tablet a steroid?
Yes, Alflaz 30mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Alflaz 30mg Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Alflaz 30mg Tablet used for?
Alflaz 30mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
How does Alflaz 30mg Tablet work?
Alflaz 30mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Alflaz 30mg Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Alflaz 30mg Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Alflaz 30mg Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
Is Alflaz 30mg Tablet a painkiller?
No, Alflaz 30mg Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
Can I take Alflaz 30mg Tablet with Tamsulosin?
Yes, Alflaz 30mg Tablet can be taken with Tamsulosin.
No harmful effects or any other interactions have been reported when they are used together.
=

What is Alfluenza 200mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet is a medicine that belongs to a class of medicines called antiviral medicines.
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet is used for managing patients suffering from mild to moderate Covid-19 infection.
When is the best time to start treatment with Alfluenza 200mg Tablet?
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet is best taken in mildly infected individuals than in those who have severe Covid-19 infection.
This is because early use of antiviral medicines, such as Alfluenza 200mg Tablet, is seen to be more effective in treating Covid-19 infection.
Delay in treatment only slows down the recovery process and worsens the existing symptoms such as breathing issues, cough, or fever.
If left untreated, this viral infection may even lead to organ failure.
Once tested positive for Covid-19, consult your doctor immediately.
Who should not take Alfluenza 200mg Tablet?
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet should not be used for treating patients who are allergic to Alfluenza 200mg Tablet or any of its ingredients.
Children should not be given Alfluenza 200mg Tablet.
It should not be given to patients with severe kidney or liver disease too.
Additionally, people who have any abnormal uric acid levels or are suffering from gout must inform their doctor before taking Alfluenza 200mg Tablet.
If you are planning a baby, pregnant or breastfeeding, consult your doctor before starting treatment with Alfluenza 200mg Tablet to avoid any potential harm to your baby.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit.
For how long and in what dose should Alfluenza 200mg Tablet be taken?
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet should be taken in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
It is taken orally (by mouth) and the recommended dose is 1,800 mg twice on day 1, followed by 800 mg twice daily up to day 14.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Alfluenza 200mg Tablet.
Can Alfluenza 200mg Tablet be used in the elderly and children?
Since the elderly often have compromised organ functions, Alfluenza 200mg Tablet should be given with care to them, alongside regular monitoring.
Alfluenza 200mg Tablet has not been administered in children.
However, some early experimental data suggests that Alfluenza 200mg Tablet may cause serious side effects in the younger age group.
Therefore, this medicine should not be consumed by the elderly and children, unless advised by your doctor.
=

Can Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alforrd 6mg/400mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup a steroid? What is it used for?
Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
My child is restless and unable to sleep properly at night.
Can I give Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup?
No, although this medicine causes drowsiness as a side effect, it should not be given to induce sleep in children.
Consult your child’s doctor if your child has trouble sleeping as it could be due to some other underlying condition.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup?
Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
How much Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup should I give to my child?
Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup should be given strictly as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your child’s body weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your child’s condition.
What if I give too much of Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup by mistake?
Although Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup is relatively safe to use in children yet an excessive amount may cause some serious side effects such as seizures, hallucinations, rapid heart rate, irritability, slow breathing, and coma.
How should Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup be stored?
Store Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
When do I need to call my child’s doctor right away?
Always consult your child’s doctor at every step in case of any confusion.
However, immediate assistance may be required if your child develops serious side effects.
These may include allergic reactions (such as facial swelling, trouble breathing), signs of liver problem (such as dark-colored urine, yellow eyes or skin), excessive sleepiness, rapid heartbeat, hallucinations, feeling confused or hyperactive, trouble passing urine, irritability, and vision changes.
How long does it take for Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alfree 5mg/5ml Syrup.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
=

Does Alfuin 10mg Tablet shrink the prostate?
No, Alfuin 10mg Tablet does not shrink the size of the prostate.
It belongs to alpha-blocker class of medicines.
It works by relaxing muscles of bladder and prostate to allow urine to flow more easily.
It helps in relieving symptoms of an enlarged prostate.
Can Alfuin 10mg Tablet cause erectile dysfunction?
No, Alfuin 10mg Tablet does not cause erectile dysfunction.
On the contrary, it may help in improving such condition.
However, this medicine may cause painful erection (priapism) which does not go away.
If priapism is not treated you may not be able to get an erection in the future.
When should I take Alfuin 10mg Tablet?
Alfuin 10mg Tablet should be taken after meals at the same time each day.
Do not cut, crush, or chew the medicine, but swallow it whole with water.
Does Alfuin 10mg Tablet have any effect on liver?
In very rare cases your liver may be affected and cause liver function abnormality.
Inform the doctor if you already have liver disease before starting the medication.
The doctor will prescribe a lower dose of Alfuin 10mg Tablet once or twice daily.
Can Alfuin 10mg Tablet be taken by old or elderly people?
Yes, it can be taken by elderly or old people, but they need to be careful.
Regular monitoring is required in case the patient also has high blood pressure.
Can Alfuin 10mg Tablet affect my eyes?
In rare cases, Alfuin 10mg Tablet may cause abnormal vision.
But, it is important to know that this medicine may cause complications during surgery, if you are to be operated for cataract.
Hence, inform your doctor before surgery that you are taking Alfuin 10mg Tablet.
Your doctor may perform surgery differently and complications can be prevented.
Can the use of sildenafil or vardenafil cause trouble when taken along with Alfuin 10mg Tablet?
Extreme care should be taken if you are taking sildenafil or vardenafil along with Alfuin 10mg Tablet.
The combination may cause a significant decrease in blood pressure which can be serious.
Inform your doctor if you are taking these medicines.
=

Does Alfunol 10mg Tablet shrink the prostate?
No, Alfunol 10mg Tablet does not shrink the size of the prostate.
It belongs to alpha-blocker class of medicines.
It works by relaxing muscles of bladder and prostate to allow urine to flow more easily.
It helps in relieving symptoms of an enlarged prostate.
Can Alfunol 10mg Tablet cause erectile dysfunction?
No, Alfunol 10mg Tablet does not cause erectile dysfunction.
On the contrary, it may help in improving such condition.
However, this medicine may cause painful erection (priapism) which does not go away.
If priapism is not treated you may not be able to get an erection in the future.
When should I take Alfunol 10mg Tablet?
Alfunol 10mg Tablet should be taken after meals at the same time each day.
Do not cut, crush, or chew the medicine, but swallow it whole with water.
Does Alfunol 10mg Tablet have any effect on liver?
In very rare cases your liver may be affected and cause liver function abnormality.
Inform the doctor if you already have liver disease before starting the medication.
The doctor will prescribe a lower dose of Alfunol 10mg Tablet once or twice daily.
Can Alfunol 10mg Tablet be taken by old or elderly people?
Yes, it can be taken by elderly or old people, but they need to be careful.
Regular monitoring is required in case the patient also has high blood pressure.
Can Alfunol 10mg Tablet affect my eyes?
In rare cases, Alfunol 10mg Tablet may cause abnormal vision.
But, it is important to know that this medicine may cause complications during surgery, if you are to be operated for cataract.
Hence, inform your doctor before surgery that you are taking Alfunol 10mg Tablet.
Your doctor may perform surgery differently and complications can be prevented.
Can the use of sildenafil or vardenafil cause trouble when taken along with Alfunol 10mg Tablet?
Extreme care should be taken if you are taking sildenafil or vardenafil along with Alfunol 10mg Tablet.
The combination may cause a significant decrease in blood pressure which can be serious.
Inform your doctor if you are taking these medicines.
What can patients do to help alleviate or prevent discomfort and side effects due to Alfunol 10mg Tablet?
Alfunol 10mg Tablet may lower your blood pressure especially when you suddenly stand up after lying down.
You may feel dizzy or fainting and therefore you should get up slowly from bed or chair.
This medicine may impair your reactions.
Hence, avoid driving or hazardous activities until you know how this medicine will affect you.
=

Does Alfustat 10mg Tablet shrink the prostate?
No, Alfustat 10mg Tablet does not shrink the size of the prostate.
It belongs to alpha-blocker class of medicines.
It works by relaxing muscles of bladder and prostate to allow urine to flow more easily.
It helps in relieving symptoms of an enlarged prostate.
Can Alfustat 10mg Tablet cause erectile dysfunction?
No, Alfustat 10mg Tablet does not cause erectile dysfunction.
On the contrary, it may help in improving such condition.
However, this medicine may cause painful erection (priapism) which does not go away.
If priapism is not treated you may not be able to get an erection in the future.
When should I take Alfustat 10mg Tablet?
Alfustat 10mg Tablet should be taken after meals at the same time each day.
Do not cut, crush, or chew the medicine, but swallow it whole with water.
Does Alfustat 10mg Tablet have any effect on liver?
In very rare cases your liver may be affected and cause liver function abnormality.
Inform the doctor if you already have liver disease before starting the medication.
The doctor will prescribe a lower dose of Alfustat 10mg Tablet once or twice daily.
Can Alfustat 10mg Tablet be taken by old or elderly people?
Yes, it can be taken by elderly or old people, but they need to be careful.
Regular monitoring is required in case the patient also has high blood pressure.
Can Alfustat 10mg Tablet affect my eyes?
In rare cases, Alfustat 10mg Tablet may cause abnormal vision.
But, it is important to know that this medicine may cause complications during surgery, if you are to be operated for cataract.
Hence, inform your doctor before surgery that you are taking Alfustat 10mg Tablet.
Your doctor may perform surgery differently and complications can be prevented.
=

Does Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER shrink the prostate?
No, Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER does not shrink the size of the prostate.
It belongs to the alpha-blocker class of medicines.
It helps in relieving symptoms of an enlarged prostate.
It works by relaxing the muscles of the bladder and prostate to allow urine to flow more easily.
Can Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER cause erectile dysfunction?
No, Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER does not cause erectile dysfunction.
On the contrary, it may help in improving any such condition.
However, this medicine may cause painful erection (priapism) which does not go away.
If priapism is not treated, you may not be able to get an erection in the future.
When should I take Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER?
Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER should be taken after meals at the same time each day.
Do not cut, crush or chew the medicine, but swallow it whole with water.
Does Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER have any effect on the liver?
In very rare cases your liver may be affected and cause liver function abnormality.
Hence, it would best to inform the doctor if you already have liver disease before starting the medication.
The doctor will prescribe a lower dose of Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER once or twice daily.
Can Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER be taken by old or elderly people?
Yes, it can be taken by elderly or old people, but they need to be careful.
Regular monitoring is required in case the patient also has high blood pressure.
Consult your doctor before taking Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER.
Can Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER affect my eyes?
In rare cases, Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER may cause abnormal vision.
But, it is important to know that this medicine may cause complications during surgery if you are to be operated for cataract.
Hence, inform your doctor before surgery that you are taking Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER.
Your doctor may perform surgery differently to prevent any complications.
Can the use of Sildenafil or Vardenafil cause trouble when taken along with Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER?
Extreme care should be taken if you are taking Sildenafil or Vardenafil along with Alfuzosin-D Tablet ER.
The combination may cause a significant decrease in blood pressure which can be serious.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are taking these medicines.
=

What is Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule?
Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Rabeprazole.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
Aceclofenac works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Rabeprazole helps in preventing the digestive problem that may occur due to Aceclofenac.
Can I stop taking Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule when my pain is relieved?
Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule, when used for long-term pain relief, should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule can cause nausea and vomiting.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can I take Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
What is the recommended storage condition for Algiace RB 200mg/20mg Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Will Algicough-DX Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I breastfeed while taking Algicough-DX Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Algicough-DX Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Algicough-DX Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Algicough-DX Syrup Hydrobromide may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Avoiding driving car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
=

How much Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup?
Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
Can I give Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup is considered as an overdose?
You should only take four doses of Algina 250mg/5ml Syrup in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
Is there any special diet my child needs to follow while taking this medicine?
Unless instructed by your doctor, your child should take a normal balanced diet while continuing this medicine as lack of nutrition can put your child at risk of developing medicinal toxicity.
Where should I store this medicine?
Keep this medicine at room temperature in a dry place beyond the reach of the children.
=

When should I take Algisod Oral Liquid Peppermint?
Algisod Oral Liquid Peppermint is an antacid that is known to provide effective relief from acidity and its symptoms such as heartburn, stomach discomfort, and abdominal pain.
If you are suffering from acidity or any of its symptoms, you can take this medicine.
Antacids are medications that are used to treat heartburn and work by blocking the production of stomach acids or aiding in neutralizing stomach acid.
Can I take other medicines along with Algisod Oral Liquid Peppermint?
It is advisable to maintain a gap of at least 2 hours between antacids and other medicines.
When should I not take Algisod Oral Liquid Peppermint?
Avoid taking this medicine if you are allergic to sodium alginate, sodium bicarbonate, calcium carbonate, or any ingredient of this product.
Also, this product contains sodium, people who are on a controlled sodium diet, such as those with hypertension, congestive heart failure, and renal impairment, need to talk to their doctor before taking this medicine.
How much and how often can I take this medicine?
The recommended dose for people over 18 years of age is 10 to 20 mL after meals and before bedtime, up to four times a day.
This medicine is not recommended for children.
Consult your doctor for more details.
=

Can Algoset-Plus Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Algoset-Plus Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Algoset-Plus Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Algoset-Plus Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Algoset-Plus Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlgoset-Plus Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Algoset-Plus Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Algoset-Plus Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can the use of Alicamox 500 Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Alicamox 500 Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Alicamox 500 Capsule.
Alicamox 500 Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Alicamox 500 Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Alicamox 500 Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Alicamox 500 Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Alicamox 500 Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Alicamox 500 Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Alicamox 500 Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alicamox 500 Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Alicamox 500 Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Alicamox 500 Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Alicamox 500 Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Alicamox 500 Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Alicamox 500 Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Alicamox 500 Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

What if I vomit after taking Alice 500mg Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Alice 500mg Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Alice 500mg Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Alice 500mg Tablet.
How often can I take the Alice 500mg Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Alice 500mg Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Alice 500mg Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Alice 500mg Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Alice 500mg Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Alice 500mg Tablet safe for children?
Alice 500mg Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
Is Alice 500mg Tablet an antibiotic?
No, Alice 500mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
Can I take Alice 500mg Tablet and ibuprofen together?
Ibuprofen and Alice 500mg Tablet are safe medicines, but both should not be used together.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

How much Alide P Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure safe and complete recovery of your child.
Can I change the dose of Alide P Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While an unnecessary increase in dose may lead to toxicity, a sudden lowering of the dosing may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
Can all children be given the same dose of Alide P Suspension?
Alide P Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose based on the child’s age and body weight.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
The doctor may advise you to keep giving Alide P Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the illness.
You’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better gradually as the course approaches its end.
In case your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any serious side effects of this medicine for my child?
Alide P Suspension is well-tolerated by most children.
However, if your child experiences any intolerable episodes like persistent vomiting, body swelling, decreased urine frequency, serious allergic reaction, and severe pain due to gastric ulcers, then rush to your doctor on an immediate basis.
How should I store Alide P Suspension?
Store Alide P Suspension at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Avoid leaving medicines within the reach and sight of children.
=

What is Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Drotaverine and Mefenamic acid.
This medication helps to relieve abdominal pain.
Drotaverine relieves muscle spasms associated with smooth muscles in the abdomen.
Mefenamic Acid works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (swelling).
Is it safe to use Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients with abdominal pain.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
Talk to your doctor if you have vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark coloured and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Avoid spicy, salty and acidic foods (like lemons).
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, do not take a higher than the recommended dose of Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Alidrote M 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alifex M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Aliflox 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aliflox 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aliflox 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aliflox 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Aliflox 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Aliflox 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aliflox 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Meniere's disease? Does it go away?
Meniere's disease is a disorder of the balance and hearing organs in the inner ear.
The symptoms include vertigo, fluctuations in hearing, tinnitus (ringing of the ears), and pressure in the ears.
Along with that, one may experience dizziness which in turn may cause nausea and vomiting.
The treatment for Meniere's disease depends on various factors.
Hence, an open discussion with the doctor can help to determine the best treatment strategy in your personal case.
Alihist 8mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alihist 8mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What are the triggers for Meniere's disease?
Meniere's disease can be triggered by conditions like stress, overwork, fatigue, emotional distress, additional illnesses, and pressure changes.
Along with that, certain foods such as dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, and foods with high sodium content may trigger Meniere's disease.
A 2-gram/day low-salt diet can help control vertigo in Meniere's disease.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alihist 8mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alihist 8mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is stress a reason for vertigo?
It can make many forms of vertigo worse, but will not, by itself, produce vertigo.
What are the causes of vertigo?
Vertigo may be caused either by a sudden drop in blood pressure or because of being dehydrated.
Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down.
Along with that, motion sickness, certain medicines, and problems with your inner ear (Meniere's disease, acoustic neuroma) may cause vertigo.
It is important to know that sometimes vertigo can be a symptom of other disorders (multiple sclerosis, following head trauma) as well.
How long should Alihist 8mg Tablet be taken?
Duration of treatment with Alihist 8mg Tablet may vary from patient to patient.
Some people respond rapidly to treatment while others may take some time.
Hence, it is advised to take your tablets regularly and wait for the results patiently.
Consult the doctor if not sure.
What are the common side effects of Alihist 8mg Tablet?
Alihist 8mg Tablet can cause mild stomach problems such as vomiting, stomach pain, stomach swelling (abdominal distension), and bloating.
You can reduce the chances of getting these side effects by taking Alihist 8mg Tablet with food.
However, the absorption of Alihist 8mg Tablet may get reduced when taken with food.
Alihist 8mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alihist 8mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

How often should you use Alimnator Cream?
Alimnator Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Alimnator Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Alimnator Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Alimnator Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Alimnator Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Alimnator Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Alimnator Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

For how long can Alinfec 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Alinfec 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Alinfec 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Alinfec 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Alinfec 500mg Injection administered?
Alinfec 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Alinfec 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Alinfec 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Alinfec 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alinfec 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Alinfec 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Alinfec 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alinfec 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Alinfec 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Alinfec 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Alinfec 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

How many hours does Alinor 25mg Tablet take to reduce high blood pressure?
Usually, Alinor 25mg Tablet starts working within 3 hours, but it can take up to 2 weeks to reach its full effect.
You may not feel any difference in blood pressure after taking the medicine, but this does not mean that the medicine is not working.
It is important to keep taking your medicine in the prescribed dose and duration to get the maximum benefit of Alinor 25mg Tablet.
Should I take Alinor 25mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Alinor 25mg Tablet can be taken anytime in the morning or evening, usually prescribed once or twice daily.
However, your very first dose of Alinor 25mg Tablet may make you feel dizzy, so it is better to take your first dose at bedtime.
After that, if you do not feel dizzy, you may take it any time of the day.
Follow the advice of your doctor.
It is advised to take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alinor 25mg Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Alinor 25mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What if I take more than the prescribed dose of Alinor 25mg Tablet?
If you take more than the prescribed dose, your heart rate may slow down and you may find it difficult to breathe.
It can also cause dizziness and trembling.
If you experience any of such side effects, seek immediate medical assistance.
Avoid driving yourself to avoid any mishap.
Get someone else to drive you or call for an ambulance.
Take the Alinor 25mg Tablet packet or leaflet inside it, plus any remaining medicine, with you.
What are the most common side effects of Alinor 25mg Tablet?
The most common side effects of Alinor 25mg Tablet include cold extremities (feeling extreme cold), fatigue, slow heart rate, nausea, diarrhea and dizziness.
However, these are usually mild and short-lived and not everyone will experience these side effects.
But, if these do not resolve and bother you, consult your doctor to know about ways of coping up with them.
Your doctor may also suggest ways of preventing them in future.
Can Alinor 25mg Tablet cause dizziness? How do I prevent it?
=

Is Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup safe to use?
Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup can cause diarrhea.
Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup an antibiotic?
Yes, Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup take to work?
Usually, Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup treat UTI?
Yes, Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Alipod 100mg Dry Syrup.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

After how many days of taking Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet will I start feeling better?
You may start to see an improvement in your symptoms after 1-2 weeks of starting the treatment.
In case you do not see any improvement, do not stop the medicine and consult your doctor.
It may take around 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of the medicine.
I feel that my symptoms have worsened after having started taking Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet.
Can I stop it on my own or do I need to consult the doctor?
No, do not stop taking Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet abruptly, without consulting your doctor.
This is a common problem with Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet that initially you may feel that your symptoms have worsened but the benefits start appearing after 1-2 weeks.
If the worsening does not improve even after 1-2 weeks, you must consult your doctor.
Can Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet use may affect your sex life.
It can cause decreased sexual desire and inability to reach orgasm in both men and women.
Additionally, men may even experience abnormal erection and ejaculation.
What is the effect of Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet on children?
Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet should not be used in children under 18 years of age.
The reason being, patients under 18 have an increased risk of experiencing side effects such as suicidal thoughts, aggression, oppositional behavior and anger when they take Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet.
If your doctor has prescribed Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet for your child and you are worried about these side effects, discuss it with your doctor.
I have been taking tamoxifen for breast cancer.
Can I take Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet with it?
No, you should not take Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet if you are receiving tamoxifen.
Tamoxifen often causes hot flashes (episodes of feeling extremely hot), which can be treated with Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet.
But Aliprox 37.5 CR Tablet may reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen and can lead to recurrence of breast cancer.
=

How quickly does Alispan 10mg Tablet work?
Alispan 10mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it.
The maximum benefit of this medicine is seen within 6 hours and the effect lasts for 24 hours.
Alispan 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alispan 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can Alispan 10mg Tablet cause heart problems?
Yes, Alispan 10mg Tablet may cause fast or irregular heartbeat and palpitations, especially in patients with heart problems.
Patients who are already suffering from heart disease should remain careful while taking Alispan 10mg Tablet.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you have heart problems.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alispan 10mg Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Alispan 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember it.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, take it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Alispan 10mg Tablet relieve symptoms of outdoor and indoor allergies?
Yes, Alispan 10mg Tablet relieves the symptoms of upper respiratory allergies or hay fever which can be caused by outdoor and indoor allergens.
It relieves the symptoms of itchy or watery eyes, runny nose, and sneezing, or itching of the nose or throat.
Can Alispan 10mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, drowsiness is a common side effect of this medicine.
However, it does not affect everyone.
But in case the drowsiness starts hampering your daily life, consult your doctor who might suggest another anti-allergic medicine which does not cause sleepiness.
=

How to take Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet?
Take Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet with food, exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
This medicine is usually taken twice a day with a meal for 3 days, or as directed.
On your first day of treatment, take your first dose with food, followed by your second dose 8 hours later.
Then for the next 2 days, take one dose in the morning and one dose in the evening.
Patients should be encouraged to resume normal eating as soon as food can be tolerated, since this improves the absorption of the medicine.
Can I take Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet while I am pregnant?
No, Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for women in their first trimester of pregnancy.
The reason being, it increases the chances of fetal loss.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet?
The use of Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to any of the active or inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with cases of severe malaria and in the first trimester of pregnancy.
What should I know about the storage and disposal of Alitel AL 80mg/480mg Tablet?
It is advised to keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
It should be kept out of reach of children.
=

How long does Alitop-CZ 1.2gm Injection takes to work?
Usually, Alitop-CZ 1.2gm Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Alitop-CZ 1.2gm Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

What is Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage due to long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can the use of Alivum TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Alixy Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Alixy Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Alixy Syrup?
Alixy Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Alixy Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Alixy Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alixy Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Does Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet have abuse potential?
Yes, there are several reports mentioning the abuse potential of Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet.
Therefore, it should be used with caution in patients prone to drug abuse.
What are the advantages of Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet over other benzodiazepines (BZDs)?
As compared to other benzodiazepines, Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet has lesser sedative effects, lower dependence, and lower tolerance.
However, long-term use can reduce the effectivity of the medicine and may cause dependence and addiction.
What happens if you stop taking Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet suddenly?
Stopping Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet suddenly may cause withdrawal symptoms which may include anxiety, insomnia, headache, dizziness, ringing sound in ear (tinnitus), eating disorder (anorexia), vomiting, nausea, tremor, weakness, excessive sweating (perspiration), irritability, hypersensitivity to visual and auditory stimuli.
Stopping the medicine suddenly may also cause palpitations, fast heart rate and postural hypotension (drop in blood pressure on standing).
In severe and rare cases of withdrawal from high doses, patients may develop seizures, mental disorder (psychosis), agitation, confusion, and hallucinations.
How long does Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet take to work?
Oral doses of Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet begin working within 30-60 minutes and peak at 3-4 hours.
The medicine remains in the body for 6-8 hours although higher doses can last longer.
Is Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet a muscle relaxant?
Yes, like benzodiazepines, it causes muscle relaxation, but otherwise it is mainly used for anxiety.
Is Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet good for sleep?
Like other benzodiazepines, it causes sleepiness but is mainly used for anxiety disorder.
It increases total sleep time and decreases the proportion of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, wherein your eyes move quickly in different directions.
Alizolam-MD 0.5 Tablet had no effect on sleep latency (amount of time it takes you to go from being fully awake to being asleep).
=

How do you use Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone?
Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone?
Alkacip Syrup 100ml for Kidney & Gout Stone is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

Can the use of Alkadryl Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alkadryl Syrup may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alkadryl Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alkadryl Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Alkadryl Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alkadryl Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Alkali-RD Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Alkali-RD Capsule SR?
The use of Alkali-RD Capsule SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Alkali-RD Capsule SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alkali-RD Capsule SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Alkali-RD Capsule SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alkali-RD Capsule SR can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alkali-RD Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Is it safe to use Alkali-RD Capsule SR?
Yes, Alkali-RD Capsule SR is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
=

How do you use Alkamed Syrup?
Alkamed Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkamed Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkamed Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkamed Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkamed Syrup?
Alkamed Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

For how long can Alkanit 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Alkanit 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Alkanit 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Alkanit 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Alkanit 100mg Injection administered?
Alkanit 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Alkanit 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Alkanit 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Alkanit 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alkanit 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Alkanit 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Alkanit 100mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alkanit 100mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Alkanit 100mg Injection?
=

How do you use Alkapil Syrup?
Alkapil Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkapil Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkapil Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkapil Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkapil Syrup?
Alkapil Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How do you use Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup?
Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup?
Alkarol 1.53mg Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How do you use Alkasil Syrup?
Alkasil Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkasil Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkasil Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkasil Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkasil Syrup?
Alkasil Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How do you use Alkaster Syrup?
Alkaster Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkaster Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkaster Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkaster Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkaster Syrup?
Alkaster Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How do you use Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup?
Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup?
Alkatuss 1.53gm/5ml Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Alkav-LB Tablet?
Alkav-LB Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Alkav-LB Tablet?
Alkav-LB Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Alkav-LB Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Alkav-LB Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alkav-LB Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

How do you use Alkazip Syrup?
Alkazip Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkazip Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkazip Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkazip Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkazip Syrup?
Alkazip Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How long does it take for Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet to work?
Like many medicines, Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet does not work straight away.
You might start feeling more calm and relaxed after a few weeks of taking this medicine.
Why has Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet been prescribed?
Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet is an antipsychotic drug used to treat manic episodes and Schizophrenia, a mood disorder.
It shortens the time to recovery and prevents mania from returning.
It is also used to reduce the risk of suicidal behavior in people with Schizophrenia.
Does Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet help with anxiety?
Yes, Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet helps calm the mind and decreases the level of anxiety and aggressive behavior in patients with Schizophrenia.
Is Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet addictive?
No, Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet is not addictive in nature.
No habit-forming potential has been seen with its use.
However, always follow your doctor's advice regarding the duration of its use.
When should I see my doctor?
Seek immediate medical help if you have signs of an allergic reaction (hives, difficult breathing, swelling in your face or throat) or a severe skin reaction, pain or burning when you urinate, or vaginal itching or discharge.
Can Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet can cause dizziness by reducing blood pressure.
If this happens to you, you should sit or lie down until the symptoms pass.
Always carry some sugary food or fruit juice with you in case you experience dizziness while traveling.
Why do I have to have regular blood tests while I am taking Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet?
Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet is known to cause a rare but serious side effect called “agranulocytosis”.
This side effect occurs in less than 1 out of every 100 people who take this medicine.
This side effect can result in a decrease in the number of white blood cells (infection-fighting cells) in your body.
Without enough white blood cells, your body may not be able to.
In order to prevent this, your doctor may prescribe you a blood test to check your white blood cell count.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet?
It is recommended that people taking this medicine should not drink alcohol.
This is because Alkepin Odt 100mg Tablet is an antipsychotic and taking it with alcohol can cause severe drowsiness.
This can lead to falls and accidents.
Also, drinking alcohol may make mania, depression, and anxiety worse.
Discuss any concerns you have with your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse.
=

Can I use AL Ketocer Shampoo regularly?
You can use AL Ketocer Shampoo for the duration as prescribed by your doctor.
Apply on the scalp and leave for 1-2 minutes, massage and rinse well.
Can AL Ketocer Shampoo cause hair fall?
No AL Ketocer Shampoo does not cause hair fall.
Regular use of candid shampoo will reduce dandruff and chances of hair loss.
What should I inform my doctor before using AL Ketocer Shampoo?
Before using AL Ketocer Shampoo, let your doctor know if you have a history of allergies or are allergic to any medicine.
How long should I leave AL Ketocer Shampoo on my scalp?
Do not leave AL Ketocer Shampoo in contact with your hair or skin for more than the recommended duration as irritation or burning sensation may occur.
Will I go bald if I have dandruff?
No, dandruff will not cause baldness.
If the dandruff is severe and your scalp is very itchy, the scratching can make you to pull your hair out due to the trauma of scratching, but the hair will always grow back.
Speak to your doctor if your hair fall increases.
My hair is dry and brittle, will AL Ketocer Shampoo damage my hair more?
AL Ketocer Shampoo is to control dandruff on the scalp and not the hair.
You may use the shampoo as a scalp treatment only, often sitting for 10 minutes, then rinse out and follow with regular shampoo and conditioner.
Although stress is not the direct cause of dandruff it can trigger different scalp conditions, including dandruff.
=

How do you use Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup?
Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup?
Alkisure 1.53gm Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

Will Alkof DX Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alkof DX Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alkof DX Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Alkof DX Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alkof DX Syrup Hydrobromide may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Avoiding driving car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
=

How do you use Alkossa Syrup?
Alkossa Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Alkossa Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Alkossa Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Alkossa Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Alkossa Syrup?
Alkossa Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

What is Allall 180mg Tablet used for?
Allall 180mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Allall 180mg Tablet?
Allall 180mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Allall 180mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I take Allall 180mg Tablet along with juices?
Avoid taking Allall 180mg Tablet with fatty meals and fruit juices as both can reduce the absorption of the medicine from the gut.
If you need to take it, ensure a gap of at least 4 hours to decrease any possible medicine-food interaction.
How much Allall 180mg Tablet should I take?
Allall 180mg Tablet should be taken strictly as prescribed by your doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your body's weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your condition.
How should Allall 180mg Tablet be stored?
Keep Allall 180mg Tablet at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Always keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

How long does Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule used for?
Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin.
It is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Which medicines should be avoided while taking Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule?
Allclox 250mg/250mg Capsule should be avoided with methotrexate which is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancer.
=

What is Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Allefine FX 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Allegra-M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Allegra-M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Allegra-M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Allegra-M Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Allegra-M Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Allegra-M Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Allegra-M Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Allegra-M Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Allegra-M Tablet.
Will Allegra-M Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Allegra-M Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Allemer 180mg Tablet used for?
Allemer 180mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Allemer 180mg Tablet?
Allemer 180mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Allemer 180mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I take Allemer 180mg Tablet along with juices?
Avoid taking Allemer 180mg Tablet with fatty meals and fruit juices as both can reduce the absorption of the medicine from the gut.
If you need to take it, ensure a gap of at least 4 hours to decrease any possible medicine-food interaction.
How much Allemer 180mg Tablet should I take?
Allemer 180mg Tablet should be taken strictly as prescribed by your doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your body's weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your condition.
How should Allemer 180mg Tablet be stored?
Keep Allemer 180mg Tablet at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Always keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

How quickly does Allerban 10mg Tablet work?
Allerban 10mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it.
The maximum benefit of this medicine is seen within 6 hours and the effect lasts for 24 hours.
Allerban 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Allerban 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can Allerban 10mg Tablet cause heart problems?
Yes, Allerban 10mg Tablet may cause fast or irregular heartbeat and palpitations, especially in patients with heart problems.
Patients who are already suffering from heart disease should remain careful while taking Allerban 10mg Tablet.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you have heart problems.
What if I forget to take a dose of Allerban 10mg Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Allerban 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember it.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, take it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Allerban 10mg Tablet relieve symptoms of outdoor and indoor allergies?
Yes, Allerban 10mg Tablet relieves the symptoms of upper respiratory allergies or hay fever which can be caused by outdoor and indoor allergens.
It relieves the symptoms of itchy or watery eyes, runny nose, and sneezing, or itching of the nose or throat.
Can Allerban 10mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, drowsiness is a common side effect of this medicine.
However, it does not affect everyone.
But in case the drowsiness starts hampering your daily life, consult your doctor who might suggest another anti-allergic medicine which does not cause sleepiness.
Can you overdose on Allerban 10mg Tablet?
No, never take an overdose of any medicine.
Overdose of Allerban 10mg Tablet may cause dizziness, drowsiness, fatigue and dry mouth.
If you accidentally take more than the recommended dose of Allerban 10mg Tablet, seek emergency medical service in a nearby hospital or contact your doctor immediately.
=

Allercet Cold Syrup is a combination of two medicines that help to relieve the symptoms of cold.
It consists of Chlorpheniramine, an antiallergic that relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing.
It also consists of Phenylephrine, a decongestant that narrows the small blood vessels providing relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Allercet Cold Syrup?
Allercet Cold Syrup is safe for most of the patients when taken according to the dose and duration recommended by the doctor.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, headache, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can the use of Allercet Cold Syrup cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Allercet Cold Syrup can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Allercet Cold Syrup cause sleepiness or dizziness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Allercet Cold Syrup is drowsiness.
Avoid driving, operating heavy machinery or engaging in other activities that need your full attention, unless your healthcare provider has permitted you to do so.
Do not drink alcohol or other cough and cold medicines.
Also, avoid taking medicines that help you sleep while taking Allercet Cold Syrup as it may lead to excessive drowsiness.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Allercet Cold Syrup can lead to increased side effects due to overdose.
Do not start, stop or change the dosage of your medicine before consulting your doctor.
=

Does Allercet Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Allercet Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Allercet Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Allercet Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Allercet Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Allercet Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Allercet Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Allercet Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Allercet Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Allercet Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Allercet Tablet.
Is it safe to take Allercet Tablet daily for a long time?
Allercet Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Allercet Tablet for only as long as you need it.
=

Can Allerde M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Allerde M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problem due to Allerde M Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Allerde M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Allerde M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
What should be avoided while taking Allerde M Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices including apple, orange or grapefruit, as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Allerde M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Allerde M Tablet.
Will Allerde M Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can increase the risks of side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I use Allerde M Tablet while breastfeeding?
No, Allerde M Tablet cannot be recommended to breastfeeding mothers.
Inform your doctor if you are breastfeeding the baby.
=

What is Allerfit 120 Tablet used for?
Allerfit 120 Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Allerfit 120 Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Allerfit 120 Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Allerfit 120 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Allerfit 120 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Allerfit 120 Tablet?
Allerfit 120 Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Allerfit 120 Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Allerfit 120 Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is Allerfit 120 Tablet an antibiotic?
Allerfit 120 Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It is an anti-allergy medicine and helps to treat allergic conditions such as sneezing, stuffy or runny nose, hives, etc.
On the other hand, antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
=

Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule.
Will Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Allergicure-LC Softgel Capsule can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Allergo 120mg Tablet used for?
Allergo 120mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Allergo 120mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Allergo 120mg Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Allergo 120mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Allergo 120mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Allergo 120mg Tablet?
Allergo 120mg Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Allergo 120mg Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Allergo 120mg Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is Allergo 120mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Allergo 120mg Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It is an anti-allergy medicine and helps to treat allergic conditions such as sneezing, stuffy or runny nose, hives, etc.
On the other hand, antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
Can Allergo 120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, Allergo 120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=


=

What is Allermak 120 Tablet used for?
Allermak 120 Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Allermak 120 Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Allermak 120 Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidneys, heart or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Additionally, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Also, inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, are pregnant, or breastfeeding.
What if I forget to take a dose of Allermak 120 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Allermak 120 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Who should not take Allermak 120 Tablet?
Allermak 120 Tablet should not be given to patients with known allergy to any other ingredients of this medicine.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Can I stop taking Allermak 120 Tablet if I feel better?
You should not stop taking Allermak 120 Tablet even if you feel better unless your doctor tells you to stop taking it.
This is because, stopping the medicine suddenly, without completing your full course of treatment may cause the returning of your symptoms and it can even worsen your condition.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
Is Allermak 120 Tablet an antibiotic?
Allermak 120 Tablet is not an antibiotic.
It is an anti-allergy medicine and helps to treat allergic conditions such as sneezing, stuffy or runny nose, hives, etc.
On the other hand, antibiotics are used to treat infections caused by bacteria.
=

What is Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Allermak M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Allermin Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Allermin Tablet may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Allermin Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Allermin Tablet?
Serious side effects with Allermin Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and may need urgent medical attention.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Allermin Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Allermin Tablet?
It is not recommended to use Allermin Tablet if you have high blood pressure (hypertension), any underlying serious heart condition or cardiovascular disorder, any history of stomach ulcers, overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
However, it can be taken if your doctor is aware of your conditions and advises you to take it.
The use of Allermin Tablet should also be avoided if you are taking antidepressant drugs.
These drugs, called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may include phenelzine and isocarboxazid or tricyclic antidepressants like imipramine and amitriptyline.
Can I breastfeed while taking Allermin Tablet?
No, you should not breastfeed while using Allermin Tablet.
This medicine can pass into your breast milk and may harm your baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Allerone-M Oral Suspension by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Allerone-M Oral Suspension be stored?
Allerone-M Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Allerone-M Oral Suspension make my child sleepy?
Allerone-M Oral Suspension causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Allerone-M Oral Suspension?
No, don’t start Allerone-M Oral Suspension without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Allerone-M Oral Suspension can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
=

Is Allersan 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Allersan 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Allersan 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Allersan 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Allersan 5mg Tablet to work?
Allersan 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Allersan 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Allersan 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Allersan 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Allersan 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Allersan 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Allersan 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Allersan 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Allersan 5mg Tablet
=

Is Allervict 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Allervict 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Allervict 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Allervict 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Allervict 5mg Tablet to work?
Allervict 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Allervict 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Allervict 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Allervict 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Allervict 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Allervict 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Allervict 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Allervict 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Allervict 5mg Tablet
=

My child is 1 year old.
Is it safe to give Allerzine Syrup to my child who is suffering from a common cold?
Allerzine Syrup should not be given to children less than 2 years of age as it may cause fatal respiratory depression wherein your child’s breathing may stop completely.
What if I give an overdose of Allerzine Syrup by mistake?
Always stick to the prescribed dose.
Prolonged or excess intake of Allerzine Syrup can put your child at risk of developing serious side effects like bradycardia, decreased blood pressure, confusion, delirium, disorientation, dizziness, drowsiness, and hallucinations.
Rush to your child’s doctor immediately if you feel you have given excess Allerzine Syrup to your child.
To pour out the right dose, use the calibrated cup provided with the medicine by the manufacturer.
Do not use a kitchen teaspoon as it will not give the correct estimate.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Allerzine Syrup?
Allerzine Syrup usually starts working within 30 to 60 minutes of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the symptoms persist longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Allerzine Syrup?
Allerzine Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Allerzine Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can Allerzine Syrup make my child sleepy?
Allerzine Syrup may cause mild drowsiness, making your child feel sleepy.
So, be cautious and never give this medicine if your child is suffering from a sleep disorder as this medicine can mask the symptoms of underlying sleep disorders like insomnia.
It is always best to consult your child’s doctor before giving this medicine to your child.
=

Alleto-FM Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Alleto-FM Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alleto-FM Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Alleto-FM Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alleto-FM Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alleto-FM Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Alleto-FM Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alleto-FM Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Alleto-FM Tablet.
Will Alleto-FM Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alleto-FM Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Allexit 2mg Tablet is relatively safe if used as recommended.
In case of any side effects, consult your doctor.
What is Allexit 2mg Tablet used for?
Allexit 2mg Tablet is used for treating short-term or long-term diarrhea, with or without any associated disease.
Can Allexit 2mg Tablet be used for IBS?
Allexit 2mg Tablet may be used in few cases of IBS but please consult your doctor before its use.
Can I take Allexit 2mg Tablet with antibiotics, paracetamol, ibuprofen, omeprazole, ciprofloxacin, desmopressin, ritonavir, quinidine or cotrimoxazole?
Allexit 2mg Tablet may be taken simultaneously with antibiotics, paracetamol, ibuprofen, omiprazole or ciprofloxacin.
Allexit 2mg Tablet might interact with desmopressin, ritonavir, quinidine or cotrimoxazole.
Please consult your doctor before use
Does Allexit 2mg Tablet help in opiate withdrawal?
Allexit 2mg Tablet is used in higher doses as a part of opiate withdrawal process.
However, do consult your doctor regarding the same.
No, Allexit 2mg Tablet is a safe and non-addictive anti-diarrheal drug.
Can Allexit 2mg Tablet be used for stomach cramps, nausea, stomach flu, rota virus diarrhea and gas?
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of All Fair Cream?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
How to use All Fair Cream?
Follow the directions given by the doctor.
Apply the medicine thinly and in sufficient quantity to cover the affected areas.
All Fair Cream is usually applied two or three times a day to the affected areas of skin.
Will All Fair Cream be more effective if taken more than prescribed?
No, All Fair Cream will not be more effective if overused.
Overusing the medicine can result in too much medicine being absorbed into the body.
This may lead to thinning or weakening of the skin and other serious side effects.
=

All GO-M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of All GO-M Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of All GO-M Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can All GO-M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, All GO-M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of All GO-M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of All GO-M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking All GO-M Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking All GO-M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by All GO-M Tablet.
=

Allitoflox-OZ Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Ofloxacin and Ornidazole.
They work by killing the harmful micro-organisms that can cause infection.
Together they help to treat your infection effectively.
Is it safe to use Allitoflox-OZ Tablet?
Allitoflox-OZ Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
In some patients, it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, headache, dryness in the mouth, heartburn and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Consult your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Allitoflox-OZ Tablet?
The use of Allitoflox-OZ Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to ofloxacin or to ornidazole or any medicine which belongs to the quinolone or nitroimidazole group of antimicrobial agents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Allitoflox-OZ Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms which are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I take alcohol while on Allitoflox-OZ Tablet?
You should avoid alcohol since it may add to the dizziness and sleepiness caused by Allitoflox-OZ Tablet.
Consult with your doctor, if you are not sure about the effects of the medicine.
What if I don't get better after using Allitoflox-OZ Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Allitoflox-OZ Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Allitoflox-OZ Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Allitoflox-OZ Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
=

What is Allitostate 40 Tablet used for?
Allitostate 40 Tablet is used to treat gout in adults.
It is mainly used in patients who did not respond to the treatment with allopurinol or who are not able to take allopurinol.
Gout is a type of arthritis in which uric acid, a naturally occurring substance in the body, builds up in the joints.
It causes sudden attacks of redness, swelling, pain, and heat in one or more joints.
What are the side effects of Allitostate 40 Tablet?
Allitostate 40 Tablet may cause common side effects such as abnormal liver test results, diarrhea, headache, rash, nausea, and even an increase in gout symptoms and localized swelling due to retention of fluids in tissues (edema).
Whereas, the serious side effects of Allitostate 40 Tablet include heart problems, gout flares, liver problems, and severe skin and allergic reactions.
Immediately inform your doctor if you experience any serious side effects.
How long should I take Allitostate 40 Tablet?
The dose and duration of Allitostate 40 Tablet vary from person to person and are decided by your doctor.
It may take several months before Allitostate 40 Tablet begins to prevent gout attacks.
Do not stop taking Allitostate 40 Tablet without the advice of your doctor even if you feel better.
What is the best time to take Allitostate 40 Tablet?
Allitostate 40 Tablet is advised to be taken once a day.
It can be taken at any time of the day, but preferably at the same time each day so that you remember to take it every day.
This will help maintain the levels of Allitostate 40 Tablet in the body.
You can take this medicine with or without food.
Can Allitostate 40 Tablet cause kidney damage?
Allitostate 40 Tablet may affect kidneys in different ways, though it is quite uncommon.
You may experience blood in the urine, frequent urination, kidney stones, abnormal urine tests (increased level of proteins in the urine), and a reduction in the ability of the kidneys to function properly.
Rarely, it may cause changes or decrease in urine amount due to inflammation in the kidneys (tubulointerstitial nephritis).
Consult your doctor if your kidney functions get further affected.
=

Can the use of Allmox 500mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Allmox 500mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Allmox 500mg Capsule.
Allmox 500mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Allmox 500mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Allmox 500mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Allmox 500mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Allmox 500mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Allmox 500mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Allmox 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Allmox 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Allmox 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Allmox 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Allmox 500mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Allmox 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Allmox 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
=

What is the best time of the day to take Allofienz 300mg Tablet?
Allofienz 300mg Tablet can be taken at anytime of the day but preferably should be taken at the same time each day so that you remember to take it.
It is usually prescribed once daily and should be taken after meals.
If the dose exceeds 300 mg or if your stomach is upset, you can take it in divided doses as advised by your doctor.
Why do I still get gout while taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet?
If you have started taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet, you may experience an increase in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
However, these attacks usually become shorter and less severe after several months of therapy.
The possible reason for increased attacks could be gradual breakdown of uric acid crystals, causing fluctuations in uric acid levels in the blood.
To prevent such painful events, your doctor may advise to take colchicine with Allofienz 300mg Tablet, as it can suppress the gouty attacks.
How long does it take for Allofienz 300mg Tablet to lower uric acid levels?
It may take several months before you start feeling better or notice any significant reduction in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
Initially after starting Allofienz 300mg Tablet you may experience gouty attacks.
Continue taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet even if you do not experience any considerable relief from the attacks.
Do not stop taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe you another medicine along with Allofienz 300mg Tablet to prevent the initial attacks.
It may take up to years for the body to completely get rid of all uric acid crystals.
What if I take alcohol while taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet?
You should refrain yourself from consuming alcohol while taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet as this could make your condition worse.
Also, you should avoid all foods that are rich source of proteins as it will help to prevent attacks of gout.
Consult your doctor for a detailed list of food items which need to be avoided.
It is also recommended that you drink at least 8 glasses of water or other fluids while taking Allofienz 300mg Tablet, unless your doctor has advised otherwise.
Does Allofienz 300mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Allofienz 300mg Tablet may cause drowsiness in some people.
It can even make you feel giddy (dizzy) or you may have problems with coordination.
It would be best to avoid driving or operating machinery if you experience these side effects.
However, if it is unavoidable then extreme caution should be exercised while performing such tasks.
=

How long does Allphenicol 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Allphenicol 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Allphenicol 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Allphenicol 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Allphenicol 500mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Alltec Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Caffeine, Cetirizine, Paracetamol and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold such as body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, runny and stuffy nose.
Are there any foods which I have to avoid while taking Alltec Tablet?
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or food that contain caffeine.
Foods like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate should be avoided as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or have chest discomfort.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc.) while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Alltec Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alltec Tablet may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Are there any special instructions regarding storage and disposal of this medicine?
Store your medicines in a cool dry place and keep them in the original pack or container until it is time to take them.
Store them out of sight and reach of children.
Unused medicines should be disposed of in special ways to ensure that pets, children and other people cannot consume them.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Alltec Tablet?
Serious side effects with Alltec Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
Will Alltec Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Alltec Tablet?
Yes, use of Alltec Tablet should be avoided if you have high blood pressure (hypertension), any underlying serious heart condition or cardiovascular disorder, any history of stomach ulcers or overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
However, it can be taken if your doctor is aware of your conditions and advises you to take it.
The use of Alltec Tablet should also be avoided if you are taking antidepressant drugs.
These drugs, called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may include phenelzine and isocarboxazid or tricyclic antidepressants like imipramine and amitriptyline.
=

Does Allut N 5mg Tablet reset your cycle?
Yes, Allut N 5mg Tablet may reset your cycle.
It is usually given for about 10 days to help manage heavy periods.
Usually, your periods will resume within 3 days after stopping the medication.
Your body may correct itself after 3-4 cycles and your period cycle may resume as before.
Can you bleed while taking Allut N 5mg Tablet?
Yes, Allut N 5mg Tablet may cause breakthrough bleeding or spotting in some cases.
This more likely occurs if the medicine is not taken as prescribed, such as taking lower than prescribed dose or not taking it 3 days before your periods start.
It is, therefore, very important that you take Allut N 5mg Tablet as prescribed.
How quickly does Allut N 5mg Tablet stop bleeding?
Allut N 5mg Tablet is advised to patients having heavy periods or prolonged periods.
The usual dose is prescribed to be taken 3 times a day for 10 days.
The bleeding will stop usually within 48 hours of taking it.
However, consult your doctor if the bleeding continues.
Can I get pregnant while taking Allut N 5mg Tablet?
Yes, you can get pregnant even if you are taking Allut N 5mg Tablet.
It is not a birth control pill.
Therefore, you should use contraceptives or other birth control methods while you are on Allut N 5mg Tablet.
Consult the doctor if you have any other related concerns.
For how long do I need to take Allut N 5mg Tablet?
The dose and the number of days for which you need to take Allut N 5mg Tablet will depend on the condition for which you are being treated and how well the medicine works for that condition.
For example, when taken for endometriosis it is usually prescribed once daily for 6 to 9 months or until breakthrough bleeding becomes bothersome.
When Allut N 5mg Tablet is used to bring on a normal cycle in women who have stopped menstruating, it is usually supposed to be taken once a day for 5 to 10 days during the second half of the planned menstrual cycle.
Always take the medicine exactly as advised by your doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup?
Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Allwel CV Forte Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can Allydon 5mg Tablet be used as a birth control medicine?
No, Allydon 5mg Tablet cannot be used as a birth control medicine.
It is a hormone preparation used to treat repeated miscarriages and to prevent premature birth in pregnant women.
You may need to use contraceptive methods to avoid pregnancy.
Consult with your doctor to seek options for contraceptives.
In what conditions Allydon 5mg Tablet should be avoided?
This medicine should not be used in patients with a history of blood clot events, severe liver disease, incomplete abortion, hormone-dependent carcinoma, and hypersensitivity.
I have started feeling depressed after taking Allydon 5mg Tablet? Is this normal?
Depression is one of the common side-effects of this medicine.
It is advisable to inform your doctor immediately if you get thoughts about harming yourself.
He/she might suggest a suitable alternative based on your condition.
What are the functions of natural progesterone?
Progesterone helps prepare your body for conception and pregnancy and regulates the monthly menstrual cycle.
One of progesterone's most important functions is its role in thickening the lining of the uterus each month.
=

Can Allyscot 5mg Tablet be used as a birth control medicine?
No, Allyscot 5mg Tablet cannot be used as a birth control medicine.
It is a hormone preparation used to treat repeated miscarriages and to prevent premature birth in pregnant women.
You may need to use contraceptive methods to avoid pregnancy.
Consult with your doctor to seek options for contraceptives.
In what conditions Allyscot 5mg Tablet should be avoided?
This medicine should not be used in patients with a history of blood clot events, severe liver disease, incomplete abortion, hormone-dependent carcinoma, and hypersensitivity.
I have started feeling depressed after taking Allyscot 5mg Tablet? Is this normal?
Depression is one of the common side-effects of this medicine.
It is advisable to inform your doctor immediately if you get thoughts about harming yourself.
He/she might suggest a suitable alternative based on your condition.
What are the functions of natural progesterone?
Progesterone helps prepare your body for conception and pregnancy and regulates the monthly menstrual cycle.
One of progesterone's most important functions is its role in thickening the lining of the uterus each month.
=

What is Allzole 20mg Injection used for?
Allzole 20mg Injection is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Allzole 20mg Injection also prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
Allzole 20mg Injection is also helpful as a preanesthetic medication (medicine given just before anesthesia) to reduce the chances of aspiration related complications like lung injury.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Allzole 20mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
It also helps to cut down on caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
Does Allzole 20mg Injection cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Allzole 20mg Injection can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Allzole 20mg Injection decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Allzole 20mg Injection?
You make see better results if you make certain dietary and lifestyle changes while taking Allzole 20mg Injection.
You can consult your dietician to get a diet chart that suits you best.
Eat at least 3 hours before sleeping to reduce the chances of aggravation of your symptoms at night.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
Refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake and smoking should also be avoided as they may worsen your symptoms.
Can I take alcohol with Allzole 20mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Allzole 20mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Allzole 20mg Injection, but it can increase acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
=

Does Almantin 5mg Tablet have abuse potential?
No, Almantin 5mg Tablet does not have abuse potential.
On the contrary, it may prevent excess use of addictive drugs such as morphine or ethanol.
When and how Almantin 5mg Tablet should be taken?
Almantin 5mg Tablet should be taken orally once a day.
To benefit from your medicine you should take it regularly every day at the same time of the day.
The tablets should be swallowed with some water.
The tablets can be taken with or without food.
How long does it take for Almantin 5mg Tablet to start working?
For Almantin 5mg Tablet to start working and show its full benefits, it may require between 3 and 8 hours.
The doctor may require a follow-up clinical assessment to check the progress after 4 weeks and then 6 months after the first assessment.
What are the symptoms of overdosage of Almantin 5mg Tablet?
The symptoms which can be observed due to an overdose of Almantin 5mg Tablet include tiredness, weakness, drowsiness, confusion, hallucinations, and/or vomiting.
Some may also experience diarrhea, vertigo, agitation, aggression, and walking difficulty.
How does Almantin 5mg Tablet affect a person with dementia?
Almantin 5mg Tablet belongs to a class of medications called N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists.
It works by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain.
Almantin 5mg Tablet may improve the ability to think and remember.
It may also reduce the deterioration of these abilities in people who have Alzheimer's disease.
However, with time the effectiveness of this medicine will reduce and it may not be able to cure Alzheimer's disease or prevent the loss of these abilities.
=

Can Almectin Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Almectin Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Almectin Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Almectin Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Almectin Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlmectin Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Almectin Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Almectin Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

My friend has a history of epilepsy and she was on valproic acid while receiving treatment with Almero 250mg Injection, still, she had an episode of seizure.
Any previous history with any other medication should be informed to the doctor before starting your treatment with Almero 250mg Injection.
Medicines like Almero 250mg Injection can interfere with valproic acid which is used for the treatment of epilepsy, making it less effective.
So, the reason for the recent episode of seizure could be the result of such drug interaction.
Generally, in cases like these, the doctor prescribes a different medicine.
Even though Almero 250mg Injection is used for skin infections, can it cause any skin-related problems?
Serious skin reactions are rare, but some have been reported with the use of Almero 250mg Injection.
Therefore, before starting the treatment inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicine or antibiotic.
Serious skin reactions are a type of allergic reaction.
But, if not properly managed then they can endanger life.
So, if you notice any rash along with fever or peeling of the skin, discontinue the medication and inform your doctor.
Is Almero 250mg Injection a strong antibiotic? Which infections does it treat?
Almero 250mg Injection is a broad-spectrum antibiotic which means it can treat a variety of bacterial infections.
It is used to treat infections affecting the lungs (pneumonia) and complicated infections of the urinary tract, abdomen, and skin and soft tissue infections.
Along with that, it is also helpful in treating bacterial infection of the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) and infections that occur during or after delivery.
Is Almero 250mg Injection effective against bacteria only? Can it be used for any type of bacterial infection?
Yes, Almero 250mg Injection is effective only against bacteria.
It is not effective against virus or fungal infections.
Almero 250mg Injection is effective against some bacteria which include Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S.
Therefore, its use against any other type of bacteria should be avoided.
My cousin was receiving Almero 250mg Injection for severe skin infection, but the medicine was stopped when she had a fit.
Was the fit due to Almero 250mg Injection?
There are reports which suggest the occurrence of seizures or fits with the use of Almero 250mg Injection.
However, fits are more likely to occur in patients with a history of seizures or a brain lesion (wound, ulcer, abscess or tumor) or patients having bacterial meningitis or compromised kidney function.
Consult your doctor to understand the exact reason.
For how long will I need to take Almero 250mg Injection?
=

What is Almethyl 4 Tablet used for?
Almethyl 4 Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It is also helpful in treating autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage) and certain eye disorders.
How does Almethyl 4 Tablet work?
Almethyl 4 Tablet works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Almethyl 4 Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Almethyl 4 Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Almethyl 4 Tablet?
Almethyl 4 Tablet effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Almethyl 4 Tablet in the dose that suits your requirement.
Do not alter your dose thinking that a higher dose will provide faster relief.
Rather, you may end up having undesirable side effects.
Be patient, and follow your doctor’s instructions regarding the use of Almethyl 4 Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you do not see improvement in your condition even after completing the full course of treatment.
What if I forget to take a dose of Almethyl 4 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Almethyl 4 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Almethyl 4 Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Alminth 200mg Syrup is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alminth 200mg Syrup?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Alminth 200mg Syrup.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Alminth 200mg Syrup to my child?
Alminth 200mg Syrup can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Alminth 200mg Syrup?
Alminth 200mg Syrup should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

How long should I take Almocef 100mg Tablet?
Almocef 100mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Almocef 100mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Almocef 100mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Almocef 100mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Almocef 100mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Almocef 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Almocef 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Almocef 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Almocef 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Almocef 100mg Tablet safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Almocef 100mg Tablet is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
=

How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Almocit-P 800 Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Almocit-P 800 Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain rather than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Almocit-P 800 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Almogril 6.25mg Tablet a narcotic? Does it have abuse potential?
No, Almogril 6.25mg Tablet is neither a narcotic nor does it have abuse potential.
It is an antimigraine agent which belongs to a class of compounds known as selective serotonin receptor agonists.
How often can I take Almogril 6.25mg Tablet?
The maximum daily dose is two tablets within 24 hours.
However, a gap of at least 2 hours between first and second dose needs to be maintained.
Can I take ibuprofen with Almogril 6.25mg Tablet?
Almogril 6.25mg Tablet may take 2-3 hours to show its effect, wait for it to work.
If still there is no considerable improvement then you can take NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen), but do not take additional triptans for relief.
Can Almogril 6.25mg Tablet be used for migraine prophylaxis or cluster headaches?
Almogril 6.25mg Tablet is not used for the prevention of migraine attacks or cluster headaches.
However, it should only be used in cases where a clear diagnosis of migraine has been established.
How many times can I take Almogril 6.25mg Tablet in a month?
Almogril 6.25mg Tablet is safe if you are taking this medicine for four migraine episode in a 30-day period.
However, it has not been established that the medicine is safe if used for treating an average of more than four migraine episodes in a 30-day period.
What should I tell my doctor?
Before taking Almogril 6.25mg Tablet, you should inform your doctor if you have a heart disease or any risk factor associated with it (e.g., high blood pressure, diabetes, smoking, family history of heart disease, men over 40 years of age, or a postmenopausal women), mild to moderate liver disease, or severe kidney disease.
The doctor should be informed if your headache is associated with dizziness, difficulty in walking, lack of coordination, or weakness in the leg and arm.
Along with that, it is important to inform your doctor if you are taking medicines such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g., sertraline, escitalopram oxalate, and fluoxetine) or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (e.g., venlafaxine), and duloxetine for depression.
=

Is Almount 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Almount 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Almount 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Almount 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Almount 5mg Tablet to work?
Almount 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Almount 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Almount 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Almount 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Almount 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Almount 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Almount 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Almount 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Almount 5mg Tablet
=

Can the use of Almox 500 Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Almox 500 Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Almox 500 Capsule.
Almox 500 Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Almox 500 Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Almox 500 Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Almox 500 Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Almox 500 Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Almox 500 Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Almox 500 Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Almox 500 Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
=

Can I give Almox DT 125 Tablet to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Almox DT 125 Tablet for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Almox DT 125 Tablet to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Almox DT 125 Tablet can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Almox DT 125 Tablet?
Although rare, Almox DT 125 Tablet may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Almox DT 125 Tablet?
Almox DT 125 Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Almox DT 125 Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Almox DT 125 Tablet?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
Is Almox DT 125 Tablet safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, do not give this medicine to your child in this case as a high percentage of children with infectious mononucleosis develop a skin rash (erythematous rash) while taking Almox DT 125 Tablet.
=

How is Alnacer 1000mg Infusion administered?
Alnacer 1000mg Infusion should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only.
The dose of the medicine will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Alnacer 1000mg Infusion.
What if I vomit after taking Alnacer 1000mg Infusion?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Alnacer 1000mg Infusion tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
What are the serious side effects of taking an excess of the Alnacer 1000mg Infusion?
Overdose of Alnacer 1000mg Infusione may cause severe life-threatening liver injury.
Taking more than the prescribed dose may also cause kidney injury, decreased platelet count, and even coma.
Early symptoms of an overdose include nausea, vomiting, and general tiredness.
Immediately consult a doctor or reach an emergency in case of a suspected overdose.
When will I feel better after taking the Alnacer 1000mg Infusion?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Alnacer 1000mg Infusion.
Is Alnacer 1000mg Infusion an antibiotic?
No, Alnacer 1000mg Infusion is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
=

How long does Alnacob-Plus Injection take to work?
It may take 3-4 weeks before your symptoms improve.
Alnacob-Plus Injection may take time to deliver significant results.
Use the medicine as directed and tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Alnacob-Plus Injection be more effective?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What should I know about the storage and disposal of Alnacob-Plus Injection?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Meniere's disease? Does it go away?
Meniere's disease is a disorder of the balance and hearing organs in the inner ear.
The symptoms include vertigo, fluctuations in hearing, tinnitus (ringing of the ears), and pressure in the ears.
Along with that, one may experience dizziness which in turn may cause nausea and vomiting.
The treatment for Meniere's disease depends on various factors.
Hence, an open discussion with the doctor can help to determine the best treatment strategy in your personal case.
Alnahist 16mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alnahist 16mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What are the triggers for Meniere's disease?
Meniere's disease can be triggered by conditions like stress, overwork, fatigue, emotional distress, additional illnesses, and pressure changes.
Along with that, certain foods such as dairy products, caffeine, alcohol, and foods with high sodium content may trigger Meniere's disease.
A 2-gram/day low-salt diet can help control vertigo in Meniere's disease.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alnahist 16mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alnahist 16mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is stress a reason for vertigo?
It can make many forms of vertigo worse, but will not, by itself, produce vertigo.
What are the causes of vertigo?
Vertigo may be caused either by a sudden drop in blood pressure or because of being dehydrated.
Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down.
Along with that, motion sickness, certain medicines, and problems with your inner ear (Meniere's disease, acoustic neuroma) may cause vertigo.
It is important to know that sometimes vertigo can be a symptom of other disorders (multiple sclerosis, following head trauma) as well.
How long should Alnahist 16mg Tablet be taken?
Duration of treatment with Alnahist 16mg Tablet may vary from patient to patient.
Some people respond rapidly to treatment while others may take some time.
Hence, it is advised to take your tablets regularly and wait for the results patiently.
Consult the doctor if not sure.
What are the common side effects of Alnahist 16mg Tablet?
Alnahist 16mg Tablet can cause mild stomach problems such as vomiting, stomach pain, stomach swelling (abdominal distension), and bloating.
You can reduce the chances of getting these side effects by taking Alnahist 16mg Tablet with food.
However, the absorption of Alnahist 16mg Tablet may get reduced when taken with food.
Alnahist 16mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alnahist 16mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alnahist 16mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alnahist 16mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next dose at the scheduled time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
How long should Alnahist 16mg Tablet be taken?
=

How do you administer Alnaparin 60mg Injection?
Alnaparin 60mg Injection is a medicine which is injected beneath the skin.
Fix the dose of the medicine and pinch the skin of your stomach between your finger and thumb to make a fold.
After having cleaned the area, hold the syringe like a pencil and insert the full length of the needle into the skin fold.
Inject the medicine and discard the syringe as instructed by your prescribing physician.
Follow the instructions given by the healthcare provider strictly.
Contact your doctor in case of any doubt or any reactions associated with the medicine.
What are the conditions where I should be cautious before taking Alnaparin 60mg Injection?
You must give a proper history to your doctor before you start taking Alnaparin 60mg Injection.
Inform your doctor if you have a heart valve fitted or have gastric ulcer, high blood pressure, diabetes, or kidney problems.
You should also let your doctor know if you ever had a reaction to heparin or had a recent stroke, brain or spinal surgery.
The chances of side effects and complications increase in presence of these conditions.
Consult with your doctor and follow the instructions strictly.
How to store Alnaparin 60mg Injection injections?
Store Alnaparin 60mg Injection injections at 25°C and do not freeze them.
The multiple-dose vials should not be stored for more than 28 days after the first use.
Discard the injection if you notice any particulate matter or abnormal color in the solution or any damage in the syringe.
Read the medicine package leaflet before using this medication and ask the pharmacist in case of any doubt.
Can Alnaparin 60mg Injection be used in heart attack?
Yes, Alnaparin 60mg Injection is used in the treatment of chest pain and heart attack once the standard treatment has been provided to the patient.
It is given along with another blood thinner like aspirin.
Being a blood-thinning agent, it prevents the blood from clotting and prevents any further episodes and complications.
Is it ok to inject the air bubble in Alnaparin 60mg Injection?
Yes, you should push the air bubbles into the site of injection.
Removing the air bubbles leads to loss of the medicine thereby altering the prescribed dose.
=

Is Alnec 50mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Alnec 50mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used for various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Alnec 50mg Tablet a narcotic?
No, Alnec 50mg Tablet is not a narcotic.
It belongs to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) group of medicines.
Does Alnec 50mg Tablet get you high?
No, Alnec 50mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Alnec 50mg Tablet damage your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Alnec 50mg Tablet may cause renal problems such as protein or blood in urine and painful urination.
Patients who are at maximum risk of developing kidney problems include people who are dehydrated, have heart failure, impaired kidney function, hypertension, elderly, who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Hence, for such patients kidney function monitoring is recommended.
=

Can the use of Alnim P Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Alnim P Tablet contains nimesulide and paracetamol, and both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Alnim P Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alnim P Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or you experience increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alnim P Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Alnim P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alnim P Tablet is usually used for short-term pain relief and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alnos CV Dry Syrup?
Alnos CV Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alnos CV Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alnos CV Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alnos CV Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Alnos CV Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Alnos CV Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What is Alobyd SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Alobyd SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Alobyd SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Alobyd SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Alobyd SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup.
This medicine contains Cetirizine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Do not drive car, operate machinery, work at heights or participate in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Will Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Can the use of Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alocet-XL 2.5mg/5ml/30mg/5ml Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
=

What is Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Alock SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What is Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet ?
Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Fexofenadine.
This medicine is used to treat allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneeze and cough.
It works by lowering the chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Can Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
What should be avoided in food while taking Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Do not take it with any fruit juices (such as apple, orange, or grapefruit) as they might make the drug less effective.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet as it might increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet.
Will Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alofen M 10mg/120mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Alogab‐M 75 Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Alogab‐M 75 Capsule when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Alogab‐M 75 Capsule even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Alogab‐M 75 Capsule, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Alogab‐M 75 Capsule before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Alogab‐M 75 Capsule?
Alogab‐M 75 Capsule can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Alogab‐M 75 Capsule cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alogab‐M 75 Capsule may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Alogab‐M 75 Capsule?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Alogab‐M 75 Capsule are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Alogab‐M 75 Capsule and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
=

Can the use of Alokoff Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alokoff Syrup may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Alokoff Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Alokoff Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Alokoff Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alokoff Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Alonac 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Alonac 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Alonac 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Alonac 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Alonac 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Alonac 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Alonac 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Alonac 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alonac 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alonac 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Alonac 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Alonac 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alonzaclav Dry Syrup?
Alonzaclav Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alonzaclav Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alonzaclav Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alonzaclav Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Alonzaclav Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Alonzaclav Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Alonzaclav Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Alonzaclav Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

How much Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension?
Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
My child vomited after taking Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension.
If your child vomits within 30 minutes of taking Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension, repeat the dose again.
If it has been more than 30 minutes after taking Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension and your child vomits, no need to repeat the dose and wait until it is time for the next dose.
If you are not sure, consult your doctor.
Can I give Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension is considered as an overdose?
You should only take four doses of Alopar 250mg Oral Suspension in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
=

What is the best time of the day to take Alopur 300mg Tablet?
Alopur 300mg Tablet can be taken at anytime of the day but preferably should be taken at the same time each day so that you remember to take it.
It is usually prescribed once daily and should be taken after meals.
If the dose exceeds 300 mg or if your stomach is upset, you can take it in divided doses as advised by your doctor.
Why do I still get gout while taking Alopur 300mg Tablet?
If you have started taking Alopur 300mg Tablet, you may experience an increase in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
However, these attacks usually become shorter and less severe after several months of therapy.
The possible reason for increased attacks could be gradual breakdown of uric acid crystals, causing fluctuations in uric acid levels in the blood.
To prevent such painful events, your doctor may advise to take colchicine with Alopur 300mg Tablet, as it can suppress the gouty attacks.
How long does it take for Alopur 300mg Tablet to lower uric acid levels?
It may take several months before you start feeling better or notice any significant reduction in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
Initially after starting Alopur 300mg Tablet you may experience gouty attacks.
Continue taking Alopur 300mg Tablet even if you do not experience any considerable relief from the attacks.
Do not stop taking Alopur 300mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe you another medicine along with Alopur 300mg Tablet to prevent the initial attacks.
It may take up to years for the body to completely get rid of all uric acid crystals.
What if I take alcohol while taking Alopur 300mg Tablet?
You should refrain yourself from consuming alcohol while taking Alopur 300mg Tablet as this could make your condition worse.
Also, you should avoid all foods that are rich source of proteins as it will help to prevent attacks of gout.
Consult your doctor for a detailed list of food items which need to be avoided.
It is also recommended that you drink at least 8 glasses of water or other fluids while taking Alopur 300mg Tablet, unless your doctor has advised otherwise.
Does Alopur 300mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Alopur 300mg Tablet may cause drowsiness in some people.
It can even make you feel giddy (dizzy) or you may have problems with coordination.
It would be best to avoid driving or operating machinery if you experience these side effects.
However, if it is unavoidable then extreme caution should be exercised while performing such tasks.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Alosia-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Alosia-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Alosia-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Alosia-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

How quickly does Alothium 400mg Tablet SR work?
It takes some time before you see improvement in your symptoms after taking Alothium 400mg Tablet SR.
Though it varies from person to person, it may take 1-3 weeks or longer for you to see the full benefits of Alothium 400mg Tablet SR.
Do not stop taking Alothium 400mg Tablet SR if you feel you are not improving.
Instead, discuss it with your doctor.
Does Alothium 400mg Tablet SR make you sleepy?
Yes, Alothium 400mg Tablet SR can cause nervous system disorders like sleepiness and dizziness and feeling confused.
It can also cause rapid eye movements, blurred vision, or blind spots in your eyesight.
If you experience any of these symptoms, consult your doctor.
In addition, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery as it can be hazardous for you.
Is Alothium 400mg Tablet SR bad for kidneys?
Yes, Alothium 400mg Tablet SR may cause kidney problems.
Alothium 400mg Tablet SR is not prescribed in patients who already have severe kidney impairment.
The kidney problems may not be reversible and the symptoms include swollen ankles, passing a lot of urine and feeling thirsty.
Before starting treatment with Alothium 400mg Tablet SR, your doctor will get blood tests done to see if your kidney function is normal.
During Alothium 400mg Tablet SR therapy, any gradual or sudden changes in renal function, even within the normal range, may indicate the need for re-evaluation of treatment.
Can Alothium 400mg Tablet SR cause gain in weight?
Alothium 400mg Tablet SR can cause both weight gain or weight loss.
You should keep a check on your weight during Alothium 400mg Tablet SR therapy.
If you feel you are gaining or losing too much weight, consult your doctor who will assess whether the change in weight is due to Alothium 400mg Tablet SR or some other reason.
What is the most important information I should know about Alothium 400mg Tablet SR?
Alothium 400mg Tablet SR therapy should only be started if adequate facilities for assessing Alothium 400mg Tablet SR levels are available.
This is because Alothium 400mg Tablet SR toxicity is related to increased levels of Alothium 400mg Tablet SR in blood.
Alothium 400mg Tablet SR toxicity can even occur at dose which is effective for treatment.
Therefore, your doctor may closely monitor your Alothium 400mg Tablet SR levels weekly until stabilization is achieved, then weekly for one month and then at monthly intervals thereafter.
=

Will I get cured after taking Alovir 200mg Tablet for shingles?
Alovir 200mg Tablet is an antiviral medicine effective against herpes simplex and varicella zoster viruses.
It does not cure infections caused by these viruses but helps to minimize the symptoms and shorten the duration of infection.
It does not remove the viruses from the body but prevents the viruses from dividing and spreading.
Does Alovir 200mg Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Alovir 200mg Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
What are the serious side effects of Alovir 200mg Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
Do elderly patients need to be more careful while taking Alovir 200mg Tablet?
Older adults (over age 65 years) tend to experience more side effects when taking Alovir 200mg Tablet.
The reason being, their kidneys do not flush the drug out of their system as quickly as a younger person’s kidneys would do.
Elderly patients should drink plenty of water while taking Alovir 200mg Tablet, and their kidney function should be monitored.
These patients should be given a lower dose and should be monitored for neurological problems.
What can happen if somebody takes more than the recommended dose of Alovir 200mg Tablet accidentally?
Accidental, repeated overdoses of oral Alovir 200mg Tablet over several days have resulted in nausea, vomiting, confusion and headache.
Consult your doctor in case of overdose.
=

Aloxa 500 Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aloxa 500 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aloxa 500 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Aloxa 500 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aloxa 500 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aloxa 500 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aloxa 500 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Aloxa 500 Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Aloxa 500 Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Aloxa 500 Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, the use of Aloxa 500 Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle.
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aloxa 500 Tablet but it may be more significant in people above 60 years of age.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
=

I have been prescribed Aloycit 500mg Tablet for Alzheimer’s disease.
What is its role, and how does it work?
Aloycit 500mg Tablet is a form of an essential nutrient called choline which is naturally present in the body.
It protects the nerve cells in the brain from damage and also helps to repair the damaged nerve cells.
Therefore, it improves learning, memory, and cognitive function (processing information or perception) in Alzheimer’s disease.
Can I take alcohol during treatment with Aloycit 500mg Tablet?
There are no studies to determine the effect of alcohol on treatment with Aloycit 500mg Tablet.
However, since Aloycit 500mg Tablet is prescribed for stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, head injury, and age-related memory impairment, it is best to avoid the consumption of alcohol.
Can students take Aloycit 500mg Tablet to improve memory and learning?
No, students should not take Aloycit 500mg Tablet since studies show that Aloycit 500mg Tablet is effective only in age-related memory problems, memory problems associated with long-standing stroke, and in Alzheimer’s disease.
Moreover, there is no data available for use of this medicine in children.
What is the role of Aloycit 500mg Tablet in stroke?
In cases of stroke caused due to blood clots, taking Aloycit 500mg Tablet orally can help the patient recover completely within 3 months.
=

What is Alp 1mg Tablet SR used for?
Alp 1mg Tablet SR is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is Alp 1mg Tablet SR safe?
Alp 1mg Tablet SR is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alp 1mg Tablet SR addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alp 1mg Tablet SR has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alp 1mg Tablet SR is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alp 1mg Tablet SR an opioid?
No, Alp 1mg Tablet SR is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alp 1mg Tablet SR an anti-depressant?
No, Alp 1mg Tablet SR is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

Alpagin 500mg Injection is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
Alpagin 500mg Injection is banned in India.
=

How long does Alpataz 250mg/31.25mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Alpataz 250mg/31.25mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Alpataz 250mg/31.25mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

What is Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
The use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alpenta D 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
=

Is Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack effective?
Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What is benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH)?
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is also known as prostate gland enlargement.
It is a common condition in older men.
BPH may cause symptoms like frequent or urgent need to urinate, increased frequency of urination at night (nocturia) and inability to completely empty the bladder.
Can the use of Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
These symptoms could be due to the presence of silodosin in the medicine.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack?
The use of Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack is considered to be harmful in patients who are allergic to any active or inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
If not sure, consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Is Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack safe?
Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What is the best time to take Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack?
It is best to take Alphacept-D 4 Capsule Combipack after meals.
The capsules should be swallowed whole; do not chew or split.
Follow the doctor’s advice properly and do not miss the dose.
=

Alphaday Tablet is a form of essential amino acid.
When given as a therapy, it exerts a metabolic benefit to the body.
Alphaday Tablet is most commonly used as nutrition therapy or dietary supplements in patients with chronic kidney failure.
This medicine prevents the unnecessary increase in urea levels in the blood due to the intake of non-essential amino acids in patients with kidney failure.
In what disease conditions can Alphaday Tablet be used?
Most commonly, Alphaday Tablet is used as a nutritional supplement in long-term kidney disease.
Alphaday Tablet is also given during heart surgery to reduce the chances of complications.
It is also reported to be rarely used along with physiotherapy in the treatment of pain in tendons.
It may also be used in treating intestinal and stomach disorders, lung diseases, and as an add-on treatment in bacterial infections, but very rarely.
Is Alphaday Tablet the same as Arginine alpha-ketoglutarate?
Alphaday Tablet is a combination of various essential amino acids.
It is mostly used in the prevention and treatment of damages due to faulty or deficient protein metabolism in chronic kidney disease.
On the other hand, Arginine alpha-ketoglutarate is a combination of the essential amino acid arginine and alpha-ketoglutaric acid.
Although both Alphaday Tablet and Arginine alpha-ketoglutarate are different, their uses are almost similar.
The usual advice for an adult is to take the tablets during meals as it helps in proper absorption or usage of the amino acids.
The tablets must not be chewed.
Alphaday Tablet should be given along with dietary protein restriction in cases of kidney failure.
The duration of treatment depends on the severity of the kidney problem.
=

Alphadopa L Tablet is generally considered a safe medicine if it is taken as directed by the doctor.
The side effects that result with use of Alphadopa L Tablet occur during the first few weeks of treatment and disappear with time.
Why is Alphadopa L Tablet used in pregnancy?
It is important to appropriately treat high blood pressure in pregnancy.
Studies have shown that poorly controlled high blood pressure in pregnancy can lead to an increased risk of certain birth defects, stillbirth, reduced growth of the baby within the womb, and premature birth.
For some women with high blood pressure, treatment with Alphadopa L Tablet in pregnancy might be considered to be the best option.
Your doctor is the best person to help you decide what is right for you and your baby.
Does Alphadopa L Tablet cause itching?
Yes, itchy skin, a rash or tingly scalp are common side effects of Alphadopa L Tablet.
Speak to your doctor if the itchiness or rash gets worse or lasts for more than a week.
Is it safe to use Alphadopa L Tablet in patients with diabetes?
Diabetic patients while using Alphadopa L Tablet should regularly check the blood sugar levels.
Alphadopa L Tablet may make it difficult to recognize the warning signs of low blood sugar such as shaking and a racing heartbeat.
Consult your doctor if the blood sugar levels are reduced while taking Alphadopa L Tablet.
Does Alphadopa L Tablet affect heart rate?
Alphadopa L Tablet slows down your heart rate and makes it easier for your heart to pump blood around your body.
Your doctor may regularly check your blood pressure and pulse (heart rate) during therapy to determine your response to the medicine.
What can happen if I stop taking Alphadopa L Tablet?
Do not stop taking Alphadopa L Tablet without talking to your doctor.
Stopping Alphadopa L Tablet suddenly may cause serious heart problems such as angina (chest pain) or even a heart attack.
If you need to stop taking Alphadopa L Tablet, your doctor will reduce the dose slowly over 1 or 2 weeks.
=

Alphamix 500mcg Injection is a form of vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient which is required by the body to make red blood cells and maintain a healthy nervous system.
It is also important for releasing energy from food and using vitamin B11 (folic acid).
Why can’t I get sufficient vitamin B12 in my diet?
You can get vitamin B12 from sources like meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
While people who are vegetarian or vegan may not get Vitamin B12 as it is not found naturally in foods such as fruits, vegetables and grains.
Therefore, deficiency of Vitamin B12 is usually noticed in vegetarians or vegans.
What happens if I have vitamin B12 deficiency?
Deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause tiredness, weakness, constipation, loss of appetite, weight loss and megaloblastic anemia (a condition when red blood cells become larger than normal).
It may also lead to nerve problems such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.
Other symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency may include problems with balance, depression, confusion, dementia, poor memory and soreness of the mouth or tongue.
Alphamix 500mcg Injection is generally well tolerated and considered safe.
However, in some cases, rare side effects may be observed such as nausea, diarrhea, anorexia and rash.
Discontinue taking this medicine immediately if a rash occurs.
How should Alphamix 500mcg Injection be given?
Alphamix 500mcg Injection can be injected directly into a vein (intravenously) or into a muscle (intramuscularly).
The usual dose is 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Alphamix 500mcg Injection) and is given 3 times a week.
After 2 months, 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Alphamix 500mcg Injection) is given every one to three months as a part of maintenance therapy.
=

How should Alphared 4000IU Injection be stored?
In the hospital, pre-filled syringes are stored unopened in a refrigerator between 2 and 8 ℃.
If you are using this medicine at home, it is important that the pre-filled syringe is stored in your refrigerator.
Do not store it in the freezer.
Allow the pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature prior to using it.
This usually takes between 15 and 30 minutes.
Alphared 4000IU Injection pre-filled syringes that are being used or about to be used can be kept at room temperature (not above 25°C) for a maximum single period of 7 days.
Keep these pre-filled syringes away from children and protected from light.
What to do if you use too much Alphared 4000IU Injection?
Tell the doctor or nurse immediately if you think too much Alphared 4000IU Injection has been injected.
When should Alphared 4000IU Injection not be used?
Alphared 4000IU Injection should not be used if the solution is clouded or you can see particles floating in it or if the medicine has expired.
Refer to the expiry date on the label.
You should also not use the medicine if you know or think that it may have been accidentally frozen or if there has been a refrigerator failure.
Can Alphared 4000IU Injection be used in children?
Yes, Alphared 4000IU Injection is used to treat anemia caused due to chronic kidney disease in children who are above 1 year of age.
The effectiveness of Alphared 4000IU Injection and side effects seen in children are similar to adults.
Can Alphared 4000IU Injection affect blood pressure?
Yes, Alphared 4000IU Injection can affect blood pressure.
During initial therapy with Alphared 4000IU Injection, blood pressure should be monitored and those who have high blood pressure should take appropriate measures to control blood pressure.
Your doctor may stop Alphared 4000IU Injection if the blood pressure remains uncontrolled.
=

Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Sulfamethoxazole+Trimethoprim.
It is an antibiotic used to treat certain bacterial infections and works by stopping the growth of the bacteria causing the infection.
It treats urinary tract infections, ear infections, enteritis (inflammation of the small intestine), pneumonia, traveler's diarrhea, and episodes of difficulty breathing in people with chronic (long-term) bronchitis.
Is it safe to use Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet?
Yes, Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet is safe to use in most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted common side effects like Nausea, Vomiting, Skin rash, Allergic reaction.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can the use of Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods.
If you start to experience vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Try small frequent sips of the liquid.
Talk to your doctor if you have persistent vomiting and signs of dehydration like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet?
Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet is contraindicated in patients with known allergy to any of the component or excipients of this medicine and in patients with a history of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia (low platelet count), megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.
The medicine is also contraindicated in pediatric patients less than 2 months of age and in patients with marked hepatic damage or with severe renal insufficiency when renal function status cannot be monitored.
What should be avoided while taking the Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet?
It is advised to not skip the dose.
Skipping doses or not completing the full course of the medicine can decrease its effectiveness and can lead to the growth of bacteria that are resistant to the effects of it.
Yes, Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet does expire.
The expiry date is written on the pack of the medicine and it refers to the last day of the month mentioned.
Do not use Alphatram 400mg/80mg Tablet after the expiry date.
=

What if I give too much of Alpod 50mg Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Alpod 50mg Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Alpod 50mg Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Alpod 50mg Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alpod 50mg Syrup?
Alpod 50mg Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alpod 50mg Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alpod 50mg Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alpod 50mg Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
=

I have been taking Alporate 300mg Tablet for a year, and I did not have any episode of seizure during this time.
For how long should I take it to cure my epilepsy completely?
Alporate 300mg Tablet does not cure your condition, it only prevents the seizures from occurring.
Therefore, you will have to keep on taking it, maybe for years.
Consult your doctor if face any problems while taking this medicine.
What happens if I stop taking Alporate 300mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Alporate 300mg Tablet suddenly.
Stopping it suddenly may increase the chances of recurrence of seizures.
Always consult your doctor if you feel the need to stop taking this medicine.
I have gained weight after I started using Alporate 300mg Tablet.
Is it because of this medicine? What should I do?
Yes, weight gain can occur with the use of Alporate 300mg Tablet.
To control your weight, you should have a healthy balanced diet and exercise regularly.
Talk to your doctor if you have any other concerns.
Can I take birth control pills while taking Alporate 300mg Tablet?
Yes, Alporate 300mg Tablet does not have any effect on the working of birth control pills.
However, contraceptives (birth control pills) may interfere with the working of Alporate 300mg Tablet and seizures may occur.
It is important that you inform your doctor that you are using birth control pills.
Your doctor will keep a track on your response to the treatment and monitor the Alporate 300mg Tablet levels in your blood levels.
Is it safe to take Alporate 300mg Tablet for long term?
Many patients can safely take Alporate 300mg Tablet for a long time.
Rarely, long-term use of Alporate 300mg Tablet may weaken your bones, thereby increasing their chances of breaking easily (osteoporosis and osteopenia).
If you are taking Alporate 300mg Tablet for a long time, get regular check ups done for bone health.
I am concerned because I have heard that Alporate 300mg Tablet causes hair loss.
Alporate 300mg Tablet may cause thinning of hair, change of hair colour and even hair loss.
If you are concerned talk to your doctor if it is possible to reduce the dose of Alporate 300mg Tablet.
Your hair may regrow after either reducing your dose or switching to a different medicine.
=

What is Alpose 1mg Tablet used for?
Alpose 1mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpose 1mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpose 1mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpose 1mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpose 1mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpose 1mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpose 1mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpose 1mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpose 1mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alpracon 0.5mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpraf 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alpram 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alpram 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpram 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpram 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpram 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpram 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpram 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpram 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpram 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpram 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alpraquil 0.5mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Alprax 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alprax 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alprax 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alprax 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alprax 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alprax 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alprax 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alprax 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alprax 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alprax 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alpraz 0.25mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Alpred 4mg Tablet used for?
Alpred 4mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It is also helpful in treating autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage) and certain eye disorders.
How does Alpred 4mg Tablet work?
Alpred 4mg Tablet works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Alpred 4mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alpred 4mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Alpred 4mg Tablet?
Alpred 4mg Tablet effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Alpred 4mg Tablet in the dose that suits your requirement.
Do not alter your dose thinking that a higher dose will provide faster relief.
Rather, you may end up having undesirable side effects.
Be patient, and follow your doctor’s instructions regarding the use of Alpred 4mg Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you do not see improvement in your condition even after completing the full course of treatment.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alpred 4mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alpred 4mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

What is Alpride 8mg Tablet used for?
Alpride 8mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It is also helpful in treating autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage) and certain eye disorders.
How does Alpride 8mg Tablet work?
Alpride 8mg Tablet works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Alpride 8mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alpride 8mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Alpride 8mg Tablet?
Alpride 8mg Tablet effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Alpride 8mg Tablet in the dose that suits your requirement.
Do not alter your dose thinking that a higher dose will provide faster relief.
Rather, you may end up having undesirable side effects.
Be patient, and follow your doctor’s instructions regarding the use of Alpride 8mg Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you do not see improvement in your condition even after completing the full course of treatment.
What if I forget to take a dose of Alpride 8mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Alpride 8mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

What is Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alproenar 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alprowon 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What should I do if I forget to use AL Pthrin 5% Cream?
If you forget to use AL Pthrin 5% Cream, do not worry and continue using AL Pthrin 5% Cream as soon as you remember.
However, if you are not sure and have any other doubts, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop using AL Pthrin 5% Cream when I feel better?
No, do not stop using AL Pthrin 5% Cream without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
Is AL Pthrin 5% Cream safe?
AL Pthrin 5% Cream is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Use it exactly as directed by the doctor to get the most benefit.
=

Does Alquit 10mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alquit 10mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy, and weak.
If you have these symptoms, you should avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Is Alquit 10mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
Alquit 10mg Tablet is an anti-allergic medication, not a steroid.
It relieves the symptoms of allergy.
It is used to relieve runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching, and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander, and mold.
It is also used to treat symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
How long does it take for Alquit 10mg Tablet to work?
You will notice an improvement within an hour of taking Alquit 10mg Tablet.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alquit 10mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alquit 10mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Do not take two antihistamines together unless recommended by your doctor.
For how long should I continue Alquit 10mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
If you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
Similarly, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of the nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alquit 10mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alquit 10mg Tablet.
Is it safe to take Alquit 10mg Tablet daily for a long time?
=

Alrega-NT Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Nortriptyline.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain.
Can I stop taking Alrega-NT Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Alrega-NT Tablet even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Alrega-NT Tablet, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Alrega-NT Tablet?
Alrega-NT Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight..
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
DO not eat foods that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Alrega-NT Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alrega-NT Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can the use of Alrega-NT Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Alrega-NT Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly caused problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss them with your doctor but do not stop taking Alrega-NT Tablet.
=

What is the best time of the day to take Alrik 300mg Tablet?
Alrik 300mg Tablet can be taken at anytime of the day but preferably should be taken at the same time each day so that you remember to take it.
It is usually prescribed once daily and should be taken after meals.
If the dose exceeds 300 mg or if your stomach is upset, you can take it in divided doses as advised by your doctor.
Why do I still get gout while taking Alrik 300mg Tablet?
If you have started taking Alrik 300mg Tablet, you may experience an increase in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
However, these attacks usually become shorter and less severe after several months of therapy.
The possible reason for increased attacks could be gradual breakdown of uric acid crystals, causing fluctuations in uric acid levels in the blood.
To prevent such painful events, your doctor may advise to take colchicine with Alrik 300mg Tablet, as it can suppress the gouty attacks.
How long does it take for Alrik 300mg Tablet to lower uric acid levels?
It may take several months before you start feeling better or notice any significant reduction in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
Initially after starting Alrik 300mg Tablet you may experience gouty attacks.
Continue taking Alrik 300mg Tablet even if you do not experience any considerable relief from the attacks.
Do not stop taking Alrik 300mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe you another medicine along with Alrik 300mg Tablet to prevent the initial attacks.
It may take up to years for the body to completely get rid of all uric acid crystals.
What if I take alcohol while taking Alrik 300mg Tablet?
You should refrain yourself from consuming alcohol while taking Alrik 300mg Tablet as this could make your condition worse.
Also, you should avoid all foods that are rich source of proteins as it will help to prevent attacks of gout.
Consult your doctor for a detailed list of food items which need to be avoided.
It is also recommended that you drink at least 8 glasses of water or other fluids while taking Alrik 300mg Tablet, unless your doctor has advised otherwise.
Does Alrik 300mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Alrik 300mg Tablet may cause drowsiness in some people.
It can even make you feel giddy (dizzy) or you may have problems with coordination.
It would be best to avoid driving or operating machinery if you experience these side effects.
However, if it is unavoidable then extreme caution should be exercised while performing such tasks.
=

Is Alrite 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alrite 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alrite 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alrite 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alrite 5mg Tablet to work?
Alrite 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alrite 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alrite 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alrite 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alrite 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alrite 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alrite 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alrite 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alrite 5mg Tablet
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Alrocuf AT Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Alrocuf AT Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Alrocuf AT Syrup?
Alrocuf AT Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Alrocuf AT Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Alrocuf AT Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alrocuf AT Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Alropan 40mg Tablet used for?
Alropan 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Alropan 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Alropan 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Alropan 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Alropan 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Alropan 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Alropan 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Alropan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Alropan 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Alropan 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Alropan 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Alropan 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Alropan 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Alropan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Alropan 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
=

What is Alroz 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alroz 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alroz 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alroz 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alroz 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alroz 0.25mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alroz 0.25mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Alrzin-M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Alrzin-M Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Alrzin-M Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Alrzin-M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Alrzin-M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Alrzin-M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alrzin-M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Alrzin-M Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Alrzin-M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Alrzin-M Tablet.
=

What are the storage condition for Alser DP Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Alser DP Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alser DP Tablet?
Yes, Alser DP Tablet is safe for most of the patients, however, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Alser DP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Alser DP Tablet is usually used for a short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Alser DP Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your physician to do so.
Can the use of Alser DP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alser DP Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alser DP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of $ame can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alser DP Tablet?
The use of Alser DP Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Alser DP Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Alser DP Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Alser DP Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Does Alsita 100mg Tablet cause weight gain?
No, Alsita 100mg Tablet is not known to cause weight gain by itself.
However, keeping a healthy weight is an important part of managing diabetes.
Consult your doctor if you experience weight gain while taking Alsita 100mg Tablet.
Is Alsita 100mg Tablet bad for your kidneys?
No, Alsita 100mg Tablet is not bad for your kidneys if your kidney function is normal.
However, it is important to inform your doctor if you have, or ever had, any kidney problems.
If you have kidney problems, you may need dose modification.
Do I still have to manage my diet and exercise while on Alsita 100mg Tablet?
Yes, it is important to manage your diet and exercise while taking Alsita 100mg Tablet.
In addition to medicine, making healthy food choices and being physically active are also important to effectively manage blood sugar levels.
You may consult a dietitian and follow a diet chart that suits you best.
A well-balanced diet is one part of a healthy lifestyle for people with type 2 diabetes.
Additionally, thirty minutes of exercise such as a brisk walk is recommended.
Can my blood sugar levels go too low on Alsita 100mg Tablet?
Yes, it is possible that your blood sugar levels may become very low (hypoglycemia).
The chances are higher if you are on any other antidiabetic medicine or insulin along with Alsita 100mg Tablet.
Additionally, blood sugar levels can take a huge dip if you skip meals, exercise more than usual, or if you have taken an overdose of Alsita 100mg Tablet.
If you experience a sudden fall in your sugar levels, inform your doctor.
The doctor may suggest dose modification to prevent your blood sugar levels from decreasing significantly (hypoglycemia).
Follow your doctor’s advice and monitor your blood sugar levels regularly.
What will happen if I accidentally take more than the prescribed dose of Alsita 100mg Tablet?
If you have accidentally taken more than the prescribed dose of Alsita 100mg Tablet, your blood sugar levels may become too low (hypoglycemia).
This hypoglycemia may be mild or severe.
Monitor your blood sugar levels more frequently for the next 24 hours.
Mild episodes of hypoglycemia (with symptoms like anxiety, sweating, weakness, tremors, fast heartbeat) can usually be corrected with the help of sugary foods such as sugar or glucose candy, fruit juice and glucose/glucon-D.
However, it is important to consult your doctor to decide the further course of treatment.
More severe episodes of hypoglycemia may even lead to a seizure (fit) or unconsciousness.
This can be life-threatening and immediate medical help may be required.
What if I miss a dose of Alsita 100mg Tablet?
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
If in case you do not remember until it is time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your regular schedule.
Do not take two doses of Alsita 100mg Tablet at the same time.
Is Alsita 100mg Tablet safe to be taken for a long term?
Yes, it is safe to take Alsita 100mg Tablet for a long time.
Its long-term use, which can continue for months, years or even lifelong, has not shown any harmful effects.
Keep taking Alsita 100mg Tablet as long as your doctor recommends it.
Remember, Alsita 100mg Tablet only helps to keep your blood sugar levels under control but does not cure your diabetes.
How long do I need to take Alsita 100mg Tablet?
Alsita 100mg Tablet only helps to manage your blood sugar levels but does not cure your diabetes.
Keep taking Alsita 100mg Tablet as long as your doctor recommends it.
You may have to take it lifelong.
It is important to keep your blood sugar levels under control as any fluctuations in your blood sugar levels may cause serious problems.
Therefore, do not stop taking it without talking to your doctor.
=

Yes, Alsium Tablet can be habit forming if used for a long time.
The risk of dependence increases with dose and duration of treatment; it is also greater in patients with a history of alcohol or drug abuse.
Therefore, the duration of treatment is generally as short as possible.
Can Alsium Tablet make me sleepy?
Yes, Alsium Tablet can make you sleepy.
It usually begins within the first month of treatment and may diminish with continued treatment.
How long does Alsium Tablet take to work?
Alsium Tablet is a fast-acting medicine, which means that it quickly gets absorbed from the bloodstream.
Alsium Tablet reaches its highest blood levels within half an hour to 4 hours after the dose is taken.
Is Alsium Tablet the same as clonazepam?
No, Alsium Tablet and clonazepam are not the same medicines but belong to the same class of drugs known as benzodiazepines.
How long does Alsium Tablet withdrawal last?
Withdrawal syndrome may develop at any time up to 3 weeks after stopping Alsium Tablet.
Withdrawal signs may last anywhere from 4 weeks to a year or more.
Can I stop taking Alsium Tablet?
No, do not stop taking Alsium Tablet even if you are feeling well, unless your doctor tells you to.
Suddenly stopping Alsium Tablet may cause unwanted effects known as withdrawal symptoms.
To prevent this, the dose of clobazam needs to be reduced gradually before completely stopping it.
Therefore, it is important that you consult your doctor first.
=

Can the use of Alspas Forte Tablet cause physical dependence?
Yes, Alspas Forte Tablet may cause physical dependence as it contains Chlordiazepoxide as one of the ingredients.
Physical dependence is defined as the occurrence of a withdrawal reaction following sudden stoppage of the drug or a decrease in dose.
Consult your doctor before taking this medicine or if you need to make any change in the dose.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alspas Forte Tablet?
The use of Alspas Forte Tablet is not recommended to patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of Alspas Forte Tablet.
Its use is also not advisable in patients of glaucoma, benign prostate enlargement and bladder neck obstruction.
What precautions do I need to take while using Alspas Forte Tablet?
Alspas Forte Tablet should not be taken along with opioids-like substances as it contains chlordiazepoxide.
Use of opioids along with chlordiazepoxide may cause excessive sedation (state of calm or sleep), respiratory depression and eventually coma or death.
Inform your doctor about all the medicines that you are taking if you are advised to take Alspas Forte Tablet.
What are the symptoms of an overdose of Alspas Forte Tablet?
Both Chlordiazepoxide and Clidinium show different symptoms of overdose.
Chlordiazepoxide can cause sleepiness, reflexes, confusion and coma.
Clidinium can cause excessive dryness of mouth, blurred vision, urinary hesitancy and constipation.
Inform the doctor in case you take a higher dose and any of these symptoms appear.
Can the use of Alspas Forte Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Alspas Forte Tablet may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Do not drive, operate any machines, work at heights, or participate in potentially dangerous activities at the start of your treatment.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Can the use of Alspas Forte Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Alspas Forte Tablet can cause constipation.
Eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals, and drink plenty of water.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or going for a walk.
Consult a doctor if constipation persists for a long duration.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Alspas Forte Tablet?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while you are taking Alspas Forte Tablet.
Drinking alcohol can increase the risk of side effects like drowsiness or sleepiness.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alspas Forte Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

How does Alsyet 250mg Tablet work?
Alsyet 250mg Tablet belongs to a class of medications called hemostatic agent.
=

My child is suffering from a seizure disorder.
Can I give Altacef Suspension to my child?
Altacef Suspension may cause seizure activity, particularly in children who have kidney disease.
So, Altacef Suspension should be used with caution in children with a history of seizure disorder.
If seizures occur, discontinue Altacef Suspension and visit your child’s doctor right away.
What if I give too much of Altacef Suspension by mistake?
An extra dose of Altacef Suspension is unlikely to harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Altacef Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Altacef Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Altacef Suspension?
Altacef Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Altacef Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Altacef Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Altacef Suspension on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Hence, you must give antibiotics to your child only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

What is Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Altase M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

What is Al-Tear Eye Drop used for?
Al-Tear Eye Drop is a tear substitute.
It is used as a lubricant for dry eyes.
It is also used for the temporary relief of burning, irritation and/or discomfort due to dryness of eyes.
Moreover, it is used to lubricate and re-wet soft and rigid gas permeable contact lenses.
It is also indicated to relieve dryness, irritation, and discomfort that may be associated with lens wear.
What are the side effects of Al-Tear Eye Drop?
You may experience visual disturbances, eye discharge, and may notice medication residue while using this medicine.
Some other side effects of this medicine include redness of the eye, eye irritation, burning and discomfort, eyelid swelling and itching of the eye.
How should Al-Tear Eye Drop be stored?
Store at or below 25°C and out of the reach of children.
Do not touch the tip of the container to any surface and replace the cap after every use.
Remember not to use the eye drops after the expiry date or after 30 days of opening it.
How should Al-Tear Eye Drop be used?
If you are using it for dry eyes, instil 1 or 2 drops in the affected eye(s) as needed.
If you are using it to lubricate soft and rigid gas-permeable lenses, apply 1 to 2 drops to each eye with the lenses on as needed or as directed by your doctor.
Blink several times after pouring the drops.
No, Al-Tear Eye Drop is a safe medicine.
It is meant for external use only and is not harmful.
In some patients, Al-Tear Eye Drop may cause eye irritation (burning and discomfort), eye pain, itchy eyes, visual disturbance.
Immediately contact your doctor if any of these effects perists.
=

Can Alten F 10/80 Tablet cause liver damage?
Alten F 10/80 Tablet contains Atorvastatin and Fenofibrate.
A very rare (1 in 10000 patient) side effect of this medicine is liver damage.
Use of this medicine should be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes, or abnormal liver enzymes.
Can Alten F 10/80 Tablet cause muscle pain?
Yes, Alten F 10/80 Tablet can cause muscle pain by injuring the muscles.
Talk to your doctor as soon as possible if you experience muscle pain, weakness or muscle cramps.
It can be a sign of any muscle injury caused due to Alten F 10/80 Tablet.
What lifestyle changes should be adopted while taking Alten F 10/80 Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Alten F 10/80 Tablet.
Stop smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having a heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and decrease your risk of heart attack.
What medicines should I avoid while taking Alten F 10/80 Tablet?
The use of Alten F 10/80 Tablet along with certain medicines can cause serious problems.
=

How to take Alther Fort Dry Syrup?
Take Alther Fort Dry Syrup with food, exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
This medicine is usually taken twice a day with a meal for 3 days, or as directed.
On your first day of treatment, take your first dose with food, followed by your second dose 8 hours later.
Then for the next 2 days, take one dose in the morning and one dose in the evening.
Patients should be encouraged to resume normal eating as soon as food can be tolerated, since this improves the absorption of the medicine.
Can I take Alther Fort Dry Syrup while I am pregnant?
No, Alther Fort Dry Syrup is considered to be harmful for women in their first trimester of pregnancy.
The reason being, it increases the chances of fetal loss.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alther Fort Dry Syrup?
The use of Alther Fort Dry Syrup is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to any of the active or inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with cases of severe malaria and in the first trimester of pregnancy.
What should I know about the storage and disposal of Alther Fort Dry Syrup?
It is advised to keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
It should be kept out of reach of children.
=

Althro 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Althro 250mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Althro 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Althro 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Althro 250mg Tablet be taken at night?
Althro 250mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Althro 250mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Althro 250mg Tablet to work?
Althro 250mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Althro 250mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Althro 250mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Althro 250mg Tablet?
=

Is Altiazem 30mg Tablet a blood thinner?
No, Altiazem 30mg Tablet is not a blood thinner.
It belongs to the calcium channel blocker class of medicines.
It is used to treat hypertension, arrhythmias and angina (chest pain caused by a reduction of oxygen to the heart muscle).
Does Altiazem 30mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Altiazem 30mg Tablet may cause weight gain but not in everybody.
However, if you are gaining weight while taking Altiazem 30mg Tablet then consult your doctor or a nutritionist.
Is it better to take Altiazem 30mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
It is recommended to take Altiazem 30mg Tablet at night and before meals.
The dose will be decided by your doctor and should be taken exactly as prescribed by the doctor.
Does Altiazem 30mg Tablet affect sleep?
Altiazem 30mg Tablet may cause sleeplessness which does not affect everyone.
If this persists and worries you talk to your doctor.
Who should not take Altiazem 30mg Tablet?
You should not take Altiazem 30mg Tablet if you are allergic to it, have an irregular or slow heartbeat, heart failure, and low blood pressure.
It should not be given to children and women who are pregnant or planning to get pregnant.
What are the symptoms of overdose of Altiazem 30mg Tablet?
Symptoms of overdose of Altiazem 30mg Tablet include slow, fast, or irregular heartbeat, fainting, difficulty breathing and seizures.
It may also cause dizziness, confusion, nausea, vomiting and increased sweating.
Contact your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical services in a nearby hospital.
=

Will Altime CF 2 mg/10 mg Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I breastfeed while taking Altime CF 2 mg/10 mg Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Altime CF 2 mg/10 mg Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Altime CF 2 mg/10 mg Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Altime CF 2 mg/10 mg Syrup Hydrobromide may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Avoiding driving car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
=

Altimic 500mcg Injection is a form of vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient which is required by the body to make red blood cells and maintain a healthy nervous system.
It is also important for releasing energy from food and using vitamin B11 (folic acid).
Why can’t I get sufficient vitamin B12 in my diet?
You can get vitamin B12 from sources like meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
While people who are vegetarian or vegan may not get Vitamin B12 as it is not found naturally in foods such as fruits, vegetables and grains.
Therefore, deficiency of Vitamin B12 is usually noticed in vegetarians or vegans.
What happens if I have vitamin B12 deficiency?
Deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause tiredness, weakness, constipation, loss of appetite, weight loss and megaloblastic anemia (a condition when red blood cells become larger than normal).
It may also lead to nerve problems such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.
Other symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency may include problems with balance, depression, confusion, dementia, poor memory and soreness of the mouth or tongue.
Altimic 500mcg Injection is generally well tolerated and considered safe.
However, in some cases, rare side effects may be observed such as nausea, diarrhea, anorexia and rash.
Discontinue taking this medicine immediately if a rash occurs.
How should Altimic 500mcg Injection be given?
Altimic 500mcg Injection can be injected directly into a vein (intravenously) or into a muscle (intramuscularly).
The usual dose is 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Altimic 500mcg Injection) and is given 3 times a week.
After 2 months, 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Altimic 500mcg Injection) is given every one to three months as a part of maintenance therapy.
What precautions need to be taken while administering Altimic 500mcg Injection?
Avoid taking the injections at the same site every time.
If there is intense pain while injecting or if the blood flows back into the syringe, take out the needle and re-insert at a different site.
=

What is Altireb 20mg Tablet used for?
Altireb 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Altireb 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Altireb 20mg Tablet to work?
Altireb 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Altireb 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Altireb 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Altireb 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Altireb 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Altireb 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Altireb 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Altireb 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Altireb 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is Altireb 20mg Tablet useful in the treatment of H.
=

What is Altiva 180mg Tablet used for?
Altiva 180mg Tablet is used for treating seasonal allergic conditions such as hay fever.
It helps to relieve allergies of the nose (allergic rhinitis), sneezing, runny nose, itching in the eyes, excessively watery eyes, etc.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Altiva 180mg Tablet?
Altiva 180mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Altiva 180mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I take Altiva 180mg Tablet along with juices?
Avoid taking Altiva 180mg Tablet with fatty meals and fruit juices as both can reduce the absorption of the medicine from the gut.
If you need to take it, ensure a gap of at least 4 hours to decrease any possible medicine-food interaction.
How much Altiva 180mg Tablet should I take?
Altiva 180mg Tablet should be taken strictly as prescribed by your doctor.
The dose of the medicine is calculated according to your body's weight and age.
Do not increase or decrease the dose on your own as it may cause unwanted effects and can worsen your condition.
How should Altiva 180mg Tablet be stored?
Keep Altiva 180mg Tablet at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Always keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

What are the storage conditions for Altocerin-GM Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Altocerin-GM Tablet cause indigestion?
Take it with or after food to avoid Indigestion.
=

How quickly does Altodin 10mg Tablet work?
Altodin 10mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it.
The maximum benefit of this medicine is seen within 6 hours and the effect lasts for 24 hours.
Altodin 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Altodin 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can Altodin 10mg Tablet cause heart problems?
Yes, Altodin 10mg Tablet may cause fast or irregular heartbeat and palpitations, especially in patients with heart problems.
Patients who are already suffering from heart disease should remain careful while taking Altodin 10mg Tablet.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you have heart problems.
What if I forget to take a dose of Altodin 10mg Tablet?
If you have missed a dose of Altodin 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember it.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, take it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Altodin 10mg Tablet relieve symptoms of outdoor and indoor allergies?
Yes, Altodin 10mg Tablet relieves the symptoms of upper respiratory allergies or hay fever which can be caused by outdoor and indoor allergens.
It relieves the symptoms of itchy or watery eyes, runny nose, and sneezing, or itching of the nose or throat.
Can Altodin 10mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, drowsiness is a common side effect of this medicine.
However, it does not affect everyone.
But in case the drowsiness starts hampering your daily life, consult your doctor who might suggest another anti-allergic medicine which does not cause sleepiness.
Can you overdose on Altodin 10mg Tablet?
No, never take an overdose of any medicine.
Overdose of Altodin 10mg Tablet may cause dizziness, drowsiness, fatigue and dry mouth.
If you accidentally take more than the recommended dose of Altodin 10mg Tablet, seek emergency medical service in a nearby hospital or contact your doctor immediately.
=

Who should not use Altomail 75mg Injection?
Use of Altomail 75mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Altomail 75mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Altomail 75mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Altomail 75mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Altomail 75mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health condition like a kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Altomail 75mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Altomail 75mg Injection administered?
Altomail 75mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

What are the advantages of Altonil 10 Tablet MD over other sleep agents?
The advantages of Altonil 10 Tablet MD over other sleep agents include that this medicine does not make the patient develop tolerance (after some time of use of Altonil 10 Tablet MD, it is no longer effective at the same dose).
Unlike other similar hypnotic drugs, Altonil 10 Tablet MD does not cause unwanted effects such as hangovers and physical dependence.
What are the natural ways to treat insomnia?
There are several natural ways which may help you treat your insomnia.
These may include avoiding caffeine and nicotine, especially late in the day.
While daily exercise is beneficial to sleep, avoid exercising four hours before bedtime.
Avoiding large meals in the evening and avoiding taking naps can also help treat insomnia.
You can try going to sleep and waking up at the same time each day.
Try to maintain a comfortable temperature in your bedroom and make the bedroom as dark as possible.
Setting aside a time to relax before bed and using relaxation techniques can also prove effective.
Does Altonil 10 Tablet MD cause weight gain?
Yes, it may cause weight gain, but it is uncommon.
Consult your doctor if you are concerned about putting on weight after taking Altonil 10 Tablet MD.
Can I take Altonil 10 Tablet MD every night?
Yes, you can take it every night but consult your doctor for the duration of treatment.
If you are taking it for jet lag, you will be suggested to take a minimum effective dose for 5 days only.
In other cases of insomnia, it can be taken for a little longer, for about 3 months.
Does Altonil 10 Tablet MD affect blood pressure?
Yes, Altonil 10 Tablet MD may cause an increase in blood pressure though it is an uncommon side effect.
Therefore, if you are hypertensive, keep a watch on your blood pressure during treatment with Altonil 10 Tablet MD.
Consult your doctor as soon as you notice a change in blood pressure.
Can I take Altonil 10 Tablet MD twice a day?
Usually Altonil 10 Tablet MD is taken once a day, before going to bed.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Altonil 10 Tablet MD is a natural hormone produced by the body which peaks to its highest levels at night.
=

Is Altopod 100 Dry Syrup safe to use?
Altopod 100 Dry Syrup is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Altopod 100 Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Altopod 100 Dry Syrup can cause diarrhea.
Altopod 100 Dry Syrup is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Altopod 100 Dry Syrup an antibiotic?
Yes, Altopod 100 Dry Syrup is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Altopod 100 Dry Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, Altopod 100 Dry Syrup may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Altopod 100 Dry Syrup when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Altopod 100 Dry Syrup before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Altopod 100 Dry Syrup take to work?
Usually, Altopod 100 Dry Syrup starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Altopod 100 Dry Syrup?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Altopod 100 Dry Syrup treat UTI?
Yes, Altopod 100 Dry Syrup may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Altopod 100 Dry Syrup.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

My child is suffering from liver failure and his investigations showed high blood ammonia levels.
Is it safe to give Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup?
It is better to avoid giving Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup as it contains lactobacillus which can further elevate the levels of blood ammonia and increase the risk of serious complications like coma.
What if I give too much of Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup by mistake?
Avoid giving more than the recommended dose because overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Although an extra dose of Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup is unlikely to harm, if you think you have given too much of Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup?
In rare cases, Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, and allergy.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup?
Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Altoxim 50 LB Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
No, yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
It is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
With symptoms often lasting for 7-10 days, this is exactly how a common cold generally progresses.
=

What is Altracid 40mg Tablet used for?
Altracid 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Altracid 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Altracid 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Altracid 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Altracid 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Altracid 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Altracid 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Altracid 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Altracid 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Altracid 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Altracid 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Altracid 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Altracid 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Altracid 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Altracid 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Altracid 40mg Tablet?
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Altramox 250mg Capsule as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Altramox 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Altramox 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Altramox 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Altramox 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Altramox 250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Altramox 250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Altranerv Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Altranerv Capsule when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Altranerv Capsule even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Altranerv Capsule, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Altranerv Capsule before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Altranerv Capsule?
Altranerv Capsule can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Altranerv Capsule cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Altranerv Capsule may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Altranerv Capsule?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Altranerv Capsule are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Altranerv Capsule and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
=

Altrex 1000mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Altrex 1000mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Altrex 1000mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Altrex 1000mg Injection?
Altrex 1000mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Altrex 1000mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Altrex 1000mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Altrex 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Altrex 1000mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Altrex 1000mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
=

What is Altrox 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Altrox 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Altrox 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Altrox 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Altrox 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Altrox 0.5mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Altrox 0.5mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Aluminum hydroxide belongs to a class of medication call antacids.
It acts by neutralizing the acids released in the stomach thus treating irritation of stomach lining
Is Aluminium Hydroxide an alkali/ weak base/strong base/amphoteric?
Aluminium Hydroxide is a strong base and is amphoteric
Aluminium Hydroxide is safe when taken for an indication and at a dose strictly instructed by your doctor
Is Aluminium Hydroxide known to cause Alzheimer's?
Aluminium Hydroxide was thought to be associated with neurological symptoms.
=

What is the best time of the day to take Alurid 100mg Tablet?
Alurid 100mg Tablet can be taken at anytime of the day but preferably should be taken at the same time each day so that you remember to take it.
It is usually prescribed once daily and should be taken after meals.
If the dose exceeds 300 mg or if your stomach is upset, you can take it in divided doses as advised by your doctor.
Why do I still get gout while taking Alurid 100mg Tablet?
If you have started taking Alurid 100mg Tablet, you may experience an increase in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
However, these attacks usually become shorter and less severe after several months of therapy.
The possible reason for increased attacks could be gradual breakdown of uric acid crystals, causing fluctuations in uric acid levels in the blood.
To prevent such painful events, your doctor may advise to take colchicine with Alurid 100mg Tablet, as it can suppress the gouty attacks.
How long does it take for Alurid 100mg Tablet to lower uric acid levels?
It may take several months before you start feeling better or notice any significant reduction in attacks of gout (severe pain, swelling, and redness).
Initially after starting Alurid 100mg Tablet you may experience gouty attacks.
Continue taking Alurid 100mg Tablet even if you do not experience any considerable relief from the attacks.
Do not stop taking Alurid 100mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe you another medicine along with Alurid 100mg Tablet to prevent the initial attacks.
It may take up to years for the body to completely get rid of all uric acid crystals.
What if I take alcohol while taking Alurid 100mg Tablet?
You should refrain yourself from consuming alcohol while taking Alurid 100mg Tablet as this could make your condition worse.
Also, you should avoid all foods that are rich source of proteins as it will help to prevent attacks of gout.
Consult your doctor for a detailed list of food items which need to be avoided.
It is also recommended that you drink at least 8 glasses of water or other fluids while taking Alurid 100mg Tablet, unless your doctor has advised otherwise.
Does Alurid 100mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Alurid 100mg Tablet may cause drowsiness in some people.
It can even make you feel giddy (dizzy) or you may have problems with coordination.
It would be best to avoid driving or operating machinery if you experience these side effects.
However, if it is unavoidable then extreme caution should be exercised while performing such tasks.
=

What should I know about high cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a type of fat present in your blood.
Total cholesterol is determined by the total amount of LDL and HDL cholesterol in the body.
LDL cholesterol is called “bad” cholesterol.
Bad cholesterol can build up in the wall of your blood vessels and slow or obstruct blood flow to your heart, brain, and other organs.
This can cause heart disease and stroke.
HDL cholesterol is called “good” cholesterol as it prevents the bad cholesterol from building up in the blood vessels.
High levels of triglycerides are also harmful to you.
Can Alvastatin 20mg Tablet cause muscle problems or muscle injury?
Yes, taking Alvastatin 20mg Tablet can cause muscle problems or muscle injury.
This is because of the reduced oxygen supply to the muscle cells which leads to fatigue, muscle pain, tenderness, or muscle weakness.
The soreness may be significant enough to interfere with your daily activities.
Do not take it lightly and consult your doctor to know about ways to prevent this and to avoid making it worse.
Is Alvastatin 20mg Tablet used for lowering cholesterol?
Alvastatin 20mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as statins, which lowers the level of lipids or fats.
Alvastatin 20mg Tablet is used to lower lipids known as cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood when a low-fat diet and lifestyle changes fail to lower the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides.
If you are at an increased risk of heart disease, Alvastatin 20mg Tablet can also be used to reduce such risk even if your cholesterol levels are normal.
You should maintain a standard cholesterol-lowering diet during treatment.
Can Alvastatin 20mg Tablet be prescribed to children?
Alvastatin 20mg Tablet is for adults and children aged 10 years or more whose cholesterol levels do not come down enough with exercise and a low-fat diet.
It is not approved for use in patients younger than 10 years old.
Is Alvastatin 20mg Tablet a blood thinner?
No, Alvastatin 20mg Tablet is not a blood thinner.
It works by slowing down the production of cholesterol in the body.
This further decreases the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the part of the body.
By lowering the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides it prevents the chances of stroke and heart attack.
=

Can Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alvet Plus 6mg/400mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet used for?
Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet is a fixed-dose combination of two antibiotics and is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
Cefixime is used to treat infections of the ear, lung, throat and urinary tract.
Azithromycin is useful in the treatment of ear infections, strep throat, pneumonia, traveler's diarrhea (loose stools and stomach cramps while traveling).
Together they can be used to treat infections of the upper respiratory tract (typhoid and pneumonia), urinary tract and sexually transmitted diseases.
What is gonorrhea and its related symptoms?
Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted disease (STD).
A patient may get this disease after having oral, vaginal or anal sex.
Many patients with gonorrhea do not have any symptoms.
Other patients may have symptoms like pain during sex, pain while urinating, discharge from the penis in males and changes in normal vaginal discharge of females.
How many days does it take to recover from typhoid?
Typhoid takes around seven and fourteen days to get cured.
However, its duration can be as short as three days, or as long as 30 days.
If left untreated, illness usually lasts for three to four weeks, but may be longer in a small number of cases.
Symptoms vary from mild to severe to life-threatening.
What is the best treatment for typhoid fever?
If typhoid fever is diagnosed in its early stages, a course of antibiotic tablets may be prescribed to you.
You will be needed to take these for 7 to 14 days.
Your symptoms will start improving within 2 to 3 days of taking medicines.
Make sure you rest, drink plenty of fluids and eat regular meals.
You should also maintain good personal hygiene, such as regularly washing your hands with soap and warm water, to reduce the risk of spreading the infection to others.
Can I stop taking Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Alvicef AZ 200mg/250mg Tablet?
=

What is Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Alvinac P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What if I give too much of Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup?
Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Alvipod 100mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
My child is having a sore throat and ear infection.
More than 80% of sore throats and ear infections are caused by a virus and antibiotics are not given for viral infections.
If your child has a sore throat, runny nose, a barky cough, pain, and discharge from the ear, it is most likely because of a virus.
Consult your child’s doctor to seek guidance.
=

For how long should I take Alviroz 20mg Tablet?
You may need to take Alviroz 20mg Tablet for life or for as long as directed by your doctor.
The cholesterol levels will be maintained only till you are taking Alviroz 20mg Tablet.
Stopping Alviroz 20mg Tablet without starting a different treatment may increase your cholesterol levels again.
This medicine has only a few side effects and is usually considered safe if taken as directed by the doctor.
Does Alviroz 20mg Tablet cause weight gain?
No, there is no evidence of Alviroz 20mg Tablet causing weight gain.
If you are taking Alviroz 20mg Tablet and gaining weight, consult your doctor.
The doctor may get some investigations done to know the reason for the weight gain.
Does Alviroz 20mg Tablet make you tired?
Yes, Alviroz 20mg Tablet can make you feel tired.
This is because it reduces the energy supply to the muscles in the body.
However, the exact reason behind the phenomenon is unknown and needs more research.
Generalized fatigue is more often in people with heart disease or those suffering from liver illness.
Alviroz 20mg Tablet also causes muscle damage which further worsens the tiredness.
Therefore, you must consult your doctor if you feel tired while taking Alviroz 20mg Tablet.
Should Alviroz 20mg Tablet be taken at night?
Alviroz 20mg Tablet should be taken once a day.
It can be taken in the morning or at night or any time of the day, with or without food.
Try taking this medicine at the same time every day.
Doing this will help you remember to take it daily.
=

What should I avoid while taking Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any of such symptoms contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure then you can consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet for?
You may have to take Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
What if Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet doesn’t make me feel any better?
High blood pressure does not usually have any symptoms, so you may not feel ill if there is any change in the blood pressure.
Therefore, this medicine may not make you feel “better”.
This does not mean that you can stop the medicine as they are working in the background to reduce your risk of serious illness.
Can Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet affect my fertility or sex life?
Alvitel AM 40mg/5mg Tablet may very rarely lead to erectile dysfunction (inability to gain or maintain an erection).
Consult your doctor if you are worried or notice some changes.
However, untreated hypertension (high blood pressure) itself can lead to erectile dysfunction, therefore it is important that you take your medicine regularly and keep track of your blood pressure.
=

How long does Alvitrox-TZ Injection takes to work?
Usually, Alvitrox-TZ Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Alvitrox-TZ Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Is Alvocet 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Alvocet 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Alvocet 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Alvocet 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Alvocet 5mg Tablet to work?
Alvocet 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Alvocet 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Alvocet 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Alvocet 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Alvocet 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Alvocet 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Alvocet 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Alvocet 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Alvocet 5mg Tablet
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Alvoflam-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Alvoflam-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Alvoflam-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Alvoflam-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Alvoflam-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Can Alvo Syrup be used in a dry cough?
No, Alvo Syrup is used in wet cough i.e.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Alvo Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Alvo Syrup in patients who are allergic to any of its component.
It should also be avoided in patients having heart disease and peptic ulcer.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Alvo Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alvo Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Alvoxy 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

What is Alwel 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alwel 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alwel 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alwel 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alwel 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alwel 0.5mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alwel 0.5mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Can Alwomin IV Oral Suspension be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Alwomin IV Oral Suspension should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Alwomin IV Oral Suspension, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Alwomin IV Oral Suspension early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Alwomin IV Oral Suspension cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlwomin IV Oral Suspension can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Alwomin IV Oral Suspension be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alwomin IV Oral Suspension?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Alycold Oral Suspension is a combination of two medicines that help to relieve the symptoms of cold.
It consists of Chlorpheniramine, an antiallergic that relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing.
It also consists of Phenylephrine, a decongestant that narrows the small blood vessels providing relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Alycold Oral Suspension?
Alycold Oral Suspension is safe for most of the patients when taken according to the dose and duration recommended by the doctor.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, headache, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can the use of Alycold Oral Suspension cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Alycold Oral Suspension can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Alycold Oral Suspension cause sleepiness or dizziness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Alycold Oral Suspension is drowsiness.
Avoid driving, operating heavy machinery or engaging in other activities that need your full attention, unless your healthcare provider has permitted you to do so.
Do not drink alcohol or other cough and cold medicines.
Also, avoid taking medicines that help you sleep while taking Alycold Oral Suspension as it may lead to excessive drowsiness.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Alycold Oral Suspension can lead to increased side effects due to overdose.
Do not start, stop or change the dosage of your medicine before consulting your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Alycold Oral Suspension?
The use of Alycold Oral Suspension is considered to be harmful to patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medication.
Tell your healthcare provider about all your medical conditions such as heart disease, high blood pressure, hyperthyroidism, glaucoma and enlarged prostate (difficulty in urination) before taking Alycold Oral Suspension.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alycold Oral Suspension?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Alyrab-DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Alyrab-DSR Capsule?
The use of Alyrab-DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Alyrab-DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Alyrab-DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Alyrab-DSR Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alyrab-DSR Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Alyrab-DSR Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can Alzea-Plus Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Alzea-Plus Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Alzea-Plus Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Alzea-Plus Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Alzea-Plus Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofAlzea-Plus Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Alzea-Plus Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Alzea-Plus Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Alzero M Syrup by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Alzero M Syrup be stored?
Alzero M Syrup should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Alzero M Syrup make my child sleepy?
Alzero M Syrup causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Alzero M Syrup?
No, don’t start Alzero M Syrup without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Alzero M Syrup can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
Can I stop the medicine by myself?
No, all symptoms may reappear on sudden withdrawal of Alzero M Syrup usually if taken for a long-term.
It is advised to stop this medicine gradually under the guidance of your child’s doctor.
=

What organisms does Alzi 250mg Injection cover?
Alzi 250mg Injection is active against pseudomonas, anaerobes, and staphylococcus bacteria.
It may not be effective against methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
How is Alzi 250mg Injection administered?
Alzi 250mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Alzi 250mg Injection.
Can the use of Alzi 250mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Alzi 250mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
Alzi 250mg Injection is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Alzi 250mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Alzi 250mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Alzi 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Alzi 250mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Alzi 250mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Why is Alzil 5 Tablet taken at night?
Alzil 5 Tablet is recommended to be taken before going to bed to reduce gastrointestinal side effects or nausea, which is commonly seen in some patients in the first few weeks of treatment.
Do the gastrointestinal side effects due to Alzil 5 Tablet persist for a long time?
Gastrointestinal side effects may appear during the first few weeks of treatment with Alzil 5 Tablet.
This can be minimized by taking Alzil 5 Tablet at bedtime and with food.
Generally, these side effects are mild and disappear within a few weeks with continued treatment.
How long does it take for Alzil 5 Tablet to start working?
Within the first month of treatment with Alzil 5 Tablet, you may experience improvement in thinking and remembering (cognitive effect).
However, it may take about 12 weeks to see the full benefits.
When should Alzil 5 Tablet be stopped?
Do not stop Alzil 5 Tablet without consulting your doctor.
This medicine only helps to control your condition but does not cure it.
Therefore, it may take several weeks to show benefits, so do not be discouraged if you do not see an improvement straight away.
But, in case your condition starts worsening and you feel that it is no longer helping you, then you should consult a doctor before stopping it.
For how long does Alzil 5 Tablet stay in your system?
Alzil 5 Tablet gets removed from the body very slowly.
It takes about two weeks or more for Alzil 5 Tablet to be completely removed from the system.
Does Alzil 5 Tablet cause depression?
No, Alzil 5 Tablet does not cause depression.
If you are experiencing symptoms, then it could be due to existing Alzheimer’s disease.
What if I take more than the prescribed dose of Alzil 5 Tablet?
Taking more than the recommended dose of Alzil 5 Tablet may cause vomiting, increased sweating or saliva production, slow heartbeat, dizziness, difficulty in breathing, seizures or fits, weakness, low blood pressure, convulsions, and inability to control your bowel motions or passing of urine (incontinence).
You should seek immediate help from a doctor or emergency service of a nearby hospital.
I have been taking indomethacin for arthritis.
Can I take Alzil 5 Tablet?
=

What is Alzin 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alzin 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alzin 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alzin 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alzin 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alzin 0.25mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alzin 0.25mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Alzirol 2% Soap used for?
Alzirol 2% Soap is used to treat skin infections which may appear on the feet (Athlete’s foot), in the groin area (jock itch), or between skin folds (sweat rash infected with a yeast infection “thrush”).
It is also used for candida infections of skin and nails.
It rapidly relieves the itching caused due to these fungal infections.
Is Alzirol 2% Soap a steroid cream?
No, Alzirol 2% Soap is not a steroid cream.
It is an anti-fungal medicine which belongs to the imidazole class of medicines.
It works by killing the fungi or by preventing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
What are the side effects of Alzirol 2% Soap?
The common side effects are application site burning, redness, and itching.
The application site may also develop some uncommon side effects such as discomfort, dryness, bleeding, severe allergic reactions, urticaria or hives, rash, skin exfoliation, sticky skin, prickling sensation, or inflammation.
Can I use a steroid cream along with Alzirol 2% Soap?
It is recommended that you use a mild steroid ointment like hydrocortisone cream/ointment in the morning and use Alzirol 2% Soap in the evening.
You can then stop using the steroid cream gradually over 2-3 weeks.
But, if you have used a potent corticosteroid for seborrheic dermatitis, maintain at least a gap of 2 weeks before you apply Alzirol 2% Soap to prevent skin sensitization.
How should Alzirol 2% Soap be applied?
Wash the affected area thoroughly with water and then dry it.
Wash your hands carefully (until and unless your hands are also affected) after applying Alzirol 2% Soap.
This will prevent the infection from spreading to other parts of the body or other people.
For how long do I need to use Alzirol 2% Soap?
You should use Alzirol 2% Soap for as long as advised by your doctor.
Generally, it is to be used for 2-4 weeks for jock itch and sweat rash and 2-6 weeks for Athlete’s foot.
Do not stop using it even if your symptoms have disappeared because the infection may reappear if not properly treated.
=

What if I give too much of Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension by mistake?
Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension is unlikely to cause any harm if an extra dose is given by mistake.
However, if you think you have given too much of Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension?
Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which all lab tests should my child undergo while taking Alzo 200mg Oral Suspension on a long term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
=

What is Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alzokam 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR used for?
ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR safe?
ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR an opioid?
No, ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR an anti-depressant?
No, ALZOLAM 1.5 MG TABLET SR is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alzom 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alzom 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alzom 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alzom 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alzom 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alzom 0.5mg Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Alzom 0.5mg Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR used for?
Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR safe?
Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR an opioid?
No, Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR an anti-depressant?
No, Alzopax 0.5mg Tablet XR is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

What is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR used for?
Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR safe?
Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Alzot 1mg Tablet SR has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR an opioid?
No, Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR an anti-depressant?
No, Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Alzot 1mg Tablet SR a narcotic substance?
No, Alzot 1mg Tablet SR is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Yes, Alzyl Tablet is an antibiotic medicine.
It is used to treat various infections caused by worms.
Alzyl Tablet should be taken only when prescribed by the doctor.
What is Alzyl Tablet used for?
Alzyl Tablet is used for the treatment of infections caused by helminths (worms) like pin worms/thread worms, roundworms, hookworms, whip worms, liver flukes and tapeworm infections.
Along with that, the medicine has shown good activity against some organisms that can survive without oxygen too, like Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas vaginalis.
Please consult your doctor before taking any treatment for worms as there could be many worms against which Alzyl Tablet would not be effective.
Alzyl Tablet works by killing the larva and the adult form of the worm by reducing the energy source (glucose) of the worms.
This helps to decrease the mobility of the worms and they die eventually.
What is the best time to take Alzyl Tablet?
Alzyl Tablet should be taken exactly as advised by the doctor.
However, it may be given once or twice a day depending on the condition you are being treated for.
It may be taken in the morning or evening.
It is usually prescribed to be taken on an empty stomach but you may be asked to take it with food for treating some conditions.
Follow your doctor’s advice carefully to get the most benefit.
Does Alzyl Tablet kill eggs of the worms?
No, Alzyl Tablet does not kill the eggs of the worms.
It acts against the larva and the adult form of the worms only.
You may have to take a second dose two weeks later, to lessen the chances of reinfection.
Alzyl Tablet should be taken only as advised by the doctor.
Consult your doctor if you have any doubts.
Alzyl Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Alzyl Tablet effective for treating pinworms?
Yes, Alzyl Tablet an effective medicine which is used for the treatment of pinworms (Enterobius vermicularis).
It shows active action against the larval and the adult stages of the worms.
Consult your doctor before taking any medicines for worm infections.
=

What is Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amaclin CV 250mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Amalgard 20mg Injection used for?
Amalgard 20mg Injection is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Amalgard 20mg Injection also prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
Amalgard 20mg Injection is also helpful as a preanesthetic medication (medicine given just before anesthesia) to reduce the chances of aspiration related complications like lung injury.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Amalgard 20mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
It also helps to cut down on caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
Does Amalgard 20mg Injection cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Amalgard 20mg Injection can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Amalgard 20mg Injection decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amalgard 20mg Injection?
You make see better results if you make certain dietary and lifestyle changes while taking Amalgard 20mg Injection.
You can consult your dietician to get a diet chart that suits you best.
Eat at least 3 hours before sleeping to reduce the chances of aggravation of your symptoms at night.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
Refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake and smoking should also be avoided as they may worsen your symptoms.
Can I take alcohol with Amalgard 20mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Amalgard 20mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Amalgard 20mg Injection, but it can increase acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
=

Does Amal T 50mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amal T 50mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amal T 50mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amal T 50mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amal T 50mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amal T 50mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amal T 50mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amal T 50mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amal T 50mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amal T 50mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amal T 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
=

How long does it take for Amanat 5mg Tablet to work?
Amanat 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amanat 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amanat 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amanat 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amanat 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amanat 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amanat 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amanat 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amanat 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amanat 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amanat 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amanat 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amanat 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

Is Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection harmful to humans?
Normally Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection is an indispensable component of the human body.
If given in required amount, it is very beneficial.
However, it can be harmful when given in more than the required amount or concentration.
In high doses, it can lead to fluid overload, swelling of feet and legs, and sodium accumulation in the body.
What does Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection do to the body?
Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection is normally present in your body.
Sodium and chloride ions help maintain the fluid and electrolyte balance in the body.
Sodium is an electrolyte which maintains the water balance in your body and keeps your body hydrated.
It helps in maintaining normal functioning of the nerves, heart and other organs.
Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection is used to treat or prevent sodium loss caused by dehydration, diarrhea or other causes.
Is Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection used to clean wounds?
Yes, Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection is used to clean wounds.
It serves as a very good solution which can be used to irrigate and wash or clean body cavities, tissues or wounds.
It also serves as a solvent for various medicines to be used in various conditions.
It is for external use only and should not be swallowed.
Do we need to be cautious while taking Amanta NS Steriport 0.9% Injection?
Yes, you should be cautious if you have certain conditions, such as heart disease or heart failure, impaired kidney function, or diabetes.
Also, stay cautious if you have swelling in various parts of your body like feet and ankles.
=

What is the dosage of Amanza 1mg Tablet?
The recommended starting dose of Amanza 1mg Tablet is 1 mg or 2 mg once daily, administered with breakfast.
If you are at a higher risk of low blood sugar (e.g., the elderly or patients with renal impairment), you will be given a starting dose of 1 mg once daily.
The usual maintenance dose is 1–4 mg once daily.
The maximum recommended dose is 8 mg once daily.
After reaching a daily dose of 2 mg, the dosage will be increased not more than 2 mg at 1- to 2-week intervals, based on your blood glucose level.
Does Amanza 1mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Amanza 1mg Tablet itself does not cause sleepiness.
However, it may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when used with other anti-diabetes medicine.
Because of this you may feel sleepy or have problems in sleeping.
Is Amanza 1mg Tablet safe for kidneys?
Amanza 1mg Tablet does not affect kidneys in patients with normal kidney function.
However, its use should be avoided in patients with severe kidney disease since Amanza 1mg Tablet is principally eliminated by the kidneys.
Does Amanza 1mg Tablet cause memory loss?
No, it is not known that Amanza 1mg Tablet causes memory loss.
However, the use of Amanza 1mg Tablet may cause low blood sugar which may cause problems with concentration and reduced alertness.
Who should not take Amanza 1mg Tablet?
Amanza 1mg Tablet should be avoided by patients who are allergic to it, have severe kidney or liver disease, have G6PD-deficiency (an inherited condition affecting red blood cells) or are due to have surgery.
Additionally, patients who are trying to get pregnant, are pregnant or breastfeeding, or have insulin-dependent diabetes (type 1 diabetes mellitus) should avoid taking Amanza 1mg Tablet.
How long does it take for Amanza 1mg Tablet to start working?
Amanza 1mg Tablet takes about 2 to 3 hours to reduce blood sugar levels.
You may not feel any difference, but this does not mean the medicine is not working.
Continue taking the medication as directed by your doctor and if you have any concerns, discuss it with your doctor.
How long do I need to take Amanza 1mg Tablet? Can I stop the medication?
Usually, the treatment for diabetes is suggested for a long term.
You may have to continue the treatment life long.
Amanza 1mg Tablet only controls the sugar levels but does not cure it.
Do not stop taking Amanza 1mg Tablet without talking to your doctor.
If you stop taking Amanza 1mg Tablet suddenly your diabetes may get worse.
What can happen if I take more than the recommended dose of Amanza 1mg Tablet?
Amanza 1mg Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
Overdose of Amanza 1mg Tablet may significantly decrease your blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
If you think you have taken an excess dose and experience a dip in your sugar level, consume enough sugar (e.g., a small bar of sugar cubes, sweet juice or sweetened tea) and inform a doctor immediately.
Severe cases of hypoglycemia accompanied by loss of consciousness and coma require immediate medical treatment and admission into hospital.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet?
Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet?
No, it is not safe to take Amarglim Plus 2mg/500mg Tablet along with alcohol, as it may lower your blood sugar levels and lead to hypoglycemia.
It can also increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
=

What is the dosage of Amaryl 1mg Tablet?
The recommended starting dose of Amaryl 1mg Tablet is 1 mg or 2 mg once daily, administered with breakfast.
If you are at a higher risk of low blood sugar (e.g., the elderly or patients with renal impairment), you will be given a starting dose of 1 mg once daily.
The usual maintenance dose is 1–4 mg once daily.
The maximum recommended dose is 8 mg once daily.
After reaching a daily dose of 2 mg, the dosage will be increased not more than 2 mg at 1- to 2-week intervals, based on your blood glucose level.
Does Amaryl 1mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Amaryl 1mg Tablet itself does not cause sleepiness.
However, it may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when used with other anti-diabetes medicine.
Because of this you may feel sleepy or have problems in sleeping.
Is Amaryl 1mg Tablet safe for kidneys?
Amaryl 1mg Tablet does not affect kidneys in patients with normal kidney function.
However, its use should be avoided in patients with severe kidney disease since Amaryl 1mg Tablet is principally eliminated by the kidneys.
Does Amaryl 1mg Tablet cause memory loss?
No, it is not known that Amaryl 1mg Tablet causes memory loss.
However, the use of Amaryl 1mg Tablet may cause low blood sugar which may cause problems with concentration and reduced alertness.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR?
Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR?
The use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Amaryl M Forte 2mg Tablet PR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

What should I know about high cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a type of fat present in your blood.
Total cholesterol is determined by the total amount of LDL and HDL cholesterol in the body.
LDL cholesterol is called “bad” cholesterol.
Bad cholesterol can build up in the wall of your blood vessels and slow or obstruct blood flow to your heart, brain, and other organs.
This can cause heart disease and stroke.
HDL cholesterol is called “good” cholesterol as it prevents the bad cholesterol from building up in the blood vessels.
High levels of triglycerides are also harmful to you.
Can Amastat 10mg Tablet cause muscle problems or muscle injury?
Yes, taking Amastat 10mg Tablet can cause muscle problems or muscle injury.
This is because of the reduced oxygen supply to the muscle cells which leads to fatigue, muscle pain, tenderness, or muscle weakness.
The soreness may be significant enough to interfere with your daily activities.
Do not take it lightly and consult your doctor to know about ways to prevent this and to avoid making it worse.
Is Amastat 10mg Tablet used for lowering cholesterol?
Amastat 10mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as statins, which lowers the level of lipids or fats.
Amastat 10mg Tablet is used to lower lipids known as cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood when a low-fat diet and lifestyle changes fail to lower the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides.
If you are at an increased risk of heart disease, Amastat 10mg Tablet can also be used to reduce such risk even if your cholesterol levels are normal.
You should maintain a standard cholesterol-lowering diet during treatment.
Can Amastat 10mg Tablet be prescribed to children?
Amastat 10mg Tablet is for adults and children aged 10 years or more whose cholesterol levels do not come down enough with exercise and a low-fat diet.
It is not approved for use in patients younger than 10 years old.
Is Amastat 10mg Tablet a blood thinner?
No, Amastat 10mg Tablet is not a blood thinner.
It works by slowing down the production of cholesterol in the body.
This further decreases the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the part of the body.
By lowering the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides it prevents the chances of stroke and heart attack.
=

Does Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR make you sleepy?
Yes, Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR do to the brain?
Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR.
Can I stop taking Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR?
You should not take Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
Is Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR addictive?
No, there is no evidence to say that Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR?
Suddenly stopping Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amazeo OD 200 Tablet SR.
=

Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Tinidazole and Ciprofloxacin.
They work by killing the harmful microorganisms that can cause infection.
Together they help to treat the infection more effectively.
Is it safe to use Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet?
Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, headache, dryness in the mouth, metallic taste, heartburn and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
What if I don't get better after using Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Ambac 500mg/600mg Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Ambenac P Syrup for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Ambenac P Syrup should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Ambenac P Syrup be stored?
Ambenac P Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Ambenac P Syrup?
Ambenac P Syrup cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Ambenac P Syrup based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Ambenac P Syrup to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Ambio LS Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Ambroxol, Levosalbutamol / Levalbuterol, Guaifenesin.
It is used in the treatment of cough with mucus.
It thins and loosens the mucus (phlegm) which makes it easier to cough out.
Levosalbutamol is a bronchodilator and it works by relaxing the muscles of the airways and widens the airways.
It works by decreasing the stickiness of the mucus (phlegm) and helps to remove it easily from the airways.
Is it safe to use Ambio LS Syrup?
Yes, it is safe to use Ambio LS Syrup in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain, allergic reaction, dizziness, headache, rash, urticaria, tremor, palpitations, muscle cramp and increased heart rate.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ambio LS Syrup?
Use of Ambio LS Syrup is considered to be harmful in patients with a history of allergy to any of the active or inactive ingredients.
Levosalbutamol and beta-blockers like propranolol should not usually be taken together.
Can the use of Ambio LS Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ambio LS Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Ambio LS Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ambio LS Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Ambio LS Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

If I do not see an improvement in my symptoms, can I stop taking Ambitam 400mg Tablet?
No, do not stop taking Ambitam 400mg Tablet on your own.
Stopping it suddenly may have unwanted effects like twitching and jerking movements.
If Ambitam 400mg Tablet does not improve your symptoms, consult your doctor.
The doctor may suggest a slow reduction of Ambitam 400mg Tablet dose.
Who should avoid taking Ambitam 400mg Tablet?
You should not take Ambitam 400mg Tablet if you are allergic to Ambitam 400mg Tablet or any of the ingredients in the medicine.
Also, avoid taking Ambitam 400mg Tablet if your kidney functions are severely deranged or if you ever had localized bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage).
You should also avoid taking this medicine if you are suffering from Huntington’s disease/chorea (a genetic disorder where the brain cells die quickly causing deterioration of mental and physical abilities over time).
What is the correct way of taking Ambitam 400mg Tablet?
Ambitam 400mg Tablet can be taken with or without food.
Swallow the tablets as a whole with a glass of water.
Do not break or chew the tablets.
If you find it difficult to swallow, tell your doctor as soon as possible.
=

Ambix L Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Ambroxol, Levosalbutamol / Levalbuterol, Guaifenesin.
It is used in the treatment of cough with mucus.
It thins and loosens the mucus (phlegm) which makes it easier to cough out.
Levosalbutamol is a bronchodilator and it works by relaxing the muscles of the airways and widens the airways.
It works by decreasing the stickiness of the mucus (phlegm) and helps to remove it easily from the airways.
Is it safe to use Ambix L Syrup?
Yes, it is safe to use Ambix L Syrup in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain, allergic reaction, dizziness, headache, rash, urticaria, tremor, palpitations, muscle cramp and increased heart rate.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ambix L Syrup?
Use of Ambix L Syrup is considered to be harmful in patients with a history of allergy to any of the active or inactive ingredients.
Levosalbutamol and beta-blockers like propranolol should not usually be taken together.
Can the use of Ambix L Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ambix L Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Ambix L Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ambix L Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Ambix L Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

My child has a severe cough.
Can I give him two cough medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by your child’s doctor.
In case of confusion, always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines that have been formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before giving it to your child.
What if my child takes too much Ambril Drop?
An overdose of Ambril Drop is known to aggravate the existing minor side effects which may require symptomatic treatment.
Consult your child’s doctor right away in case you find you have given an extra amount of the medicine by mistake.
My child is having a cough with no mucus.
Can I give Ambril Drop to him?
No, Ambril Drop is advised for the treatment of wet cough.
It aims to expel the mucus from the airway tract, thereby relieving your child from throat irritation, congestion and rendering him a soothing effect.
Whereas, for a dry cough, cough suppressants are a better option.
So, it will be wise if you ask your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
How should Ambril Drop be stored?
Ambril Drop should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any mishap.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ambroc Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Ambroc Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Ambroc Syrup?
Ambroc Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Ambroc Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Ambroc Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ambroc Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Will Ambrodil-D Junior Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I breastfeed while taking Ambrodil-D Junior Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Ambrodil-D Junior Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Can the use of Ambrodil-D Junior Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Ambrodil-D Junior Syrup Hydrobromide may make you feel drowsy or sleepy.
Avoiding driving car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how the medicine affects you.
=

Is Ambrodil Tablet good for dry cough?
Ambrodil Tablet is more effective in the treatment of productive cough associated with thickened mucus and poor mucus clearance
Does Ambrodil Tablet make you sleepy?
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ambrofast Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Ambrofast Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Ambrofast Syrup?
Ambrofast Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Ambrofast Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Ambrofast Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ambrofast Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Ofloxacin and Ornidazole.
They work by killing the harmful micro-organisms that can cause infection.
Together they help to treat your infection effectively.
Is it safe to use Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
In some patients, it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, headache, dryness in the mouth, heartburn and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Consult your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to ofloxacin or to ornidazole or any medicine which belongs to the quinolone or nitroimidazole group of antimicrobial agents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms which are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I take alcohol while on Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet?
You should avoid alcohol since it may add to the dizziness and sleepiness caused by Ambroflox OZ 200mg/500mg Tablet.
Consult with your doctor, if you are not sure about the effects of the medicine.
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
Is it safe to take Levosalbutamol if I have heart disease?
Yes, it is considered safe, but its use depends on the severity of your heart problem.
If you experience chest pain or any other symptom of worsening heart disease while taking Levosalbutamol, seek immediate medical advice.
Being a diabetic, what should I remember while taking Levosalbutamol?
Levosalbutamol may cause blood sugar levels to rise.
Therefore, your doctor may adjust your dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines.
Keep a regular check on your blood glucose levels and do not miss any dose.
Consult your doctor if you experience a sudden rise in blood sugar levels.
I have started using Levosalbutamol and I am experiencing headaches and shakiness.
Is this because of Levosalbutamol and will these go away?
Yes, it could be due to Levosalbutamol.
Feeling shaky is a common side effect of Levosalbutamol which usually goes away after some time.
For headaches, drink plenty of water, get sufficient rest and avoid alcohol.
Usually, headaches go away after a week.
If they persist for a long time, contact your doctor.
=

Can the use of Ambrolite D Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Ambrolite D Syrup may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Ambrolite D Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Ambrolite D Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Ambrolite D Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Ambrolite D Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ambromax Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Ambromax Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Ambromax Syrup?
Ambromax Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Ambromax Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Ambromax Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ambromax Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Ambrosol LS Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Ambroxol, Levosalbutamol / Levalbuterol, Guaifenesin.
It is used in the treatment of cough with mucus.
It thins and loosens the mucus (phlegm) which makes it easier to cough out.
Levosalbutamol is a bronchodilator and it works by relaxing the muscles of the airways and widens the airways.
It works by decreasing the stickiness of the mucus (phlegm) and helps to remove it easily from the airways.
Is it safe to use Ambrosol LS Syrup?
Yes, it is safe to use Ambrosol LS Syrup in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain, allergic reaction, dizziness, headache, rash, urticaria, tremor, palpitations, muscle cramp and increased heart rate.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ambrosol LS Syrup?
Use of Ambrosol LS Syrup is considered to be harmful in patients with a history of allergy to any of the active or inactive ingredients.
Levosalbutamol and beta-blockers like propranolol should not usually be taken together.
Can the use of Ambrosol LS Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ambrosol LS Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Ambrosol LS Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ambrosol LS Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
=

Can Ambrotid Syrup be used in a dry cough?
No, Ambrotid Syrup is used in wet cough i.e.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Ambrotid Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Ambrotid Syrup in patients who are allergic to any of its component.
It should also be avoided in patients having heart disease and peptic ulcer.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ambrotid Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects.
If the recommended dosage does not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ambrotid Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

My child has a cough with no mucus.
Can I give Ambroved TG Syrup?
No, Ambroved TG Syrup is advised for the treatment of wet cough.
It aims to expel the mucus from the airway tract, thereby relieving your child from throat irritation, congestion and rendering him a soothing effect.
Whereas, for a dry cough, cough suppressants are a better option.
So, it will be wise to ask your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
What if my child takes too much Ambroved TG Syrup?
An overdose or a prolonged intake of Ambroved TG Syrup may cause serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, and excess salivation.
Make sure to give this medicine to your child strictly as per the prescribed dose, time, and way.
You must also ensure not to stop the medication abruptly even if your child starts to feel better.
Sudden withdrawal of this medicine may worsen your child’s condition.
My child has a severe cough.
Can I give him two cough medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by your child’s doctor.
In case of confusion, always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medications to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines that have been formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before giving it to your child.
How should Ambroved TG Syrup be stored?
Ambroved TG Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
Is it safe to take Levosalbutamol if I have heart disease?
Yes, it is considered safe, but its use depends on the severity of your heart problem.
If you experience chest pain or any other symptom of worsening heart disease while taking Levosalbutamol, seek immediate medical advice.
Being a diabetic, what should I remember while taking Levosalbutamol?
=

Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet is a combination of Ambroxol and Salbutamol / Albuterol which relieve cough.
Ambroxol is a mucolytic which thins and loosens mucus (phlegm), making it easier to cough out.
Salbutamol is a bronchodilator which widens the airways by relaxing its muscles.
Is it safe to use Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet?
Yes, Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet is safe to you in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted side effects like tremor, headache, insomnia (difficulty in sleeping), palpitations, dizziness, nervousness, muscle cramp, increased heart rate.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any problem due to the medication.
Can Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet cause headaches and shakiness?
Yes, you may experience headache and shakiness with the use of Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet.
Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet is a combination of ambroxol and salbutamol.
Salbutamol may cause these side effects.
For headaches, drink plenty of water, get sufficient rest and avoid alcohol.
Usually headaches go away after a week.
If they persist for a long time, contact your doctor.
Feeling shaky is a common side effect of Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet and goes away after sometime.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Ambryl 30mg/2mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in.
The pack should be tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can I stop taking Ambulax-ET Tablet if I feel well?
No, you should continue taking Ambulax-ET Tablet even if you feel well.
If you stop Ambulax-ET Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal problems may occur.
Your doctor will decrease your dose gradually before asking you to stop Ambulax-ET Tablet.
Can the use of Ambulax-ET Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Ambulax-ET Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ambulax-ET Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

My child has a cough with no mucus.
No, Amburox Syrup is advised for the treatment of wet cough.
It aims to expel the mucus from the airway tract, thereby relieving your child from throat irritation, congestion and rendering him a soothing effect.
Whereas, for a dry cough, cough suppressants are a better option.
So, it will be wise to ask your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
What if my child takes too much Amburox Syrup?
An overdose or a prolonged intake of Amburox Syrup may cause serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, and excess salivation.
Make sure to give this medicine to your child strictly as per the prescribed dose, time, and way.
You must also ensure not to stop the medication abruptly even if your child starts to feel better.
Sudden withdrawal of this medicine may worsen your child’s condition.
My child has a severe cough.
Can I give him two cough medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by your child’s doctor.
In case of confusion, always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medications to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines that have been formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before giving it to your child.
How should Amburox Syrup be stored?
Amburox Syrup should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
=

How long does it take for AMCA 5MG TABLET to work?
AMCA 5MG TABLET starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does AMCA 5MG TABLET cause itching?
AMCA 5MG TABLET may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is AMCA 5MG TABLET bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that AMCA 5MG TABLET causes deterioration of kidney problems.
AMCA 5MG TABLET can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take AMCA 5MG TABLET in the morning or at night?
AMCA 5MG TABLET can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take AMCA 5MG TABLET?
You should keep on taking AMCA 5MG TABLET for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking AMCA 5MG TABLET, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amcard-AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amcard-AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amcard-AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amcard-AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amcard-AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amcard-AT Tablet?
Amcard-AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amcard-AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amcard-AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
=

Amcef 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Amcef 250mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Amcef 250mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Amcef 250mg Injection?
Amcef 250mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Amcef 250mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Amcef 250mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Amcef 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Amcef 250mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Amcef 250mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Amcef 250mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Amcef 250mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Amcef 250mg Injection administered?
Amcef 250mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amcef 250mg Injection.
=

What organisms does Amcept 250mg Injection cover?
Amcept 250mg Injection is active against pseudomonas, anaerobes, and staphylococcus bacteria.
It may not be effective against methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
How is Amcept 250mg Injection administered?
Amcept 250mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Amcept 250mg Injection.
Can the use of Amcept 250mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amcept 250mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
Amcept 250mg Injection is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amcept 250mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Amcept 250mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Amcept 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Amcept 250mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Amcept 250mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

How long does it take for Amchek 10mg Tablet to work?
Amchek 10mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amchek 10mg Tablet cause itching?
Amchek 10mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amchek 10mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amchek 10mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amchek 10mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amchek 10mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amchek 10mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amchek 10mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amchek 10mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amchek 10mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amchek 10mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amchek 10mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

For how long can Amcin 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amcin 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amcin 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amcin 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amcin 250mg Injection administered?
Amcin 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amcin 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amcin 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amcin 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amcin 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amcin 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amcin 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amcin 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amcin 250mg Injection?
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amclave Syrup?
Amclave Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amclave Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amclave Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amclave Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amclave Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amclave Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amclocent Syrup?
Amclocent Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amclocent Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amclocent Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amclocent Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amclocent Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amclocent Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amclocent Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amclocent Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

How long does Amclox Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amclox Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amclox Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amclox Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Amclox Capsule used for?
Amclox Capsule is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin and is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Can I take Amclox Capsule if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
Which are the medicines which can interact with Amclox Capsule?
It is usually avoided in patients who are already taking methotrexate.
Methotrexate is a medicine used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancers.
Taking these two medicines together can cause some serious side effects.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amclox Capsule?
Keep this medicine in the packet or container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

For how long can Amcon Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amcon Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amcon Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amcon Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Amcon Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amcon Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amcon Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amcon Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amcon Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amcon Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amcon Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amcon Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amcon Injection?
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Amcuf AM Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Amcuf AM Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Amcuf AM Syrup?
Amcuf AM Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Amcuf AM Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Amcuf AM Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amcuf AM Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is AMCV 625 Duo Tablet?
AMCV 625 Duo Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use AMCV 625 Duo Tablet?
AMCV 625 Duo Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet?
The use of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking AMCV 625 Duo Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
AMCV 625 Duo Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of AMCV 625 Duo Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking AMCV 625 Duo Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking AMCV 625 Duo Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can I stop taking Amdepin H 5 mg/12.5 mg Tablet if my blood pressure is under control?
No, you should keep taking Amdepin H 5 mg/12.5 mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled since your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Can I take other supplements for controlling my blood pressure along with Amdepin H 5 mg/12.5 mg Tablet?
No, you should not take other supplements for controlling blood pressure along with this medicine.
Always consult your doctor before taking any other medicine, supplement, or herbals while you are on this medicine.
I am experiencing nausea after starting treatment with Amdepin H 5 mg/12.5 mg Tablet.
Nausea is one of the common side effects of this medicine.
If you feel really sick, consult your doctor who may reduce the dosage or discontinue the medicine based on the severity of your condition.
Do not stop taking the medicine without consulting your doctor.
Also, eat smaller, more frequent meals to reduce the feeling of nausea.
Avoid food that is salty, spicy, fried, or fatty.
What vitals do I need to monitor while taking Amdepin H 5 mg/12.5 mg Tablet?
Your doctor will advise you to monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing, and oxygen levels closely while taking this medicine.
I am having trouble remembering to take my medications.
Is there anything I can do to help me remember?
In order to avoid missing a dose, use a calendar, pillbox, alarm clock, or cell phone alert to help you remember to take your medication.
You may also ask a family member or a friend to remind you or check in with you to be sure you are taking your medication.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amdinx-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does Amdox D 250mg/250mg Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Amdox D 250mg/250mg Tablet starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amdox D 250mg/250mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amdox D 250mg/250mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Does Amdyvir 500mg Tablet prevent transmission of infection to others?
No, you can infect other people, even while you are being treated with Amdyvir 500mg Tablet.
Herpes infections are contagious, so avoid letting infected areas come into contact with other people.
Avoid touching your eyes after touching an infected area.
Wash your hands frequently to prevent transmitting the infection to others.
You should practice safe sex by using condoms.
You should not have sex if you have genital sores or blisters.
Amdyvir 500mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Amdyvir 500mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Amdyvir 500mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amdyvir 500mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Amdyvir 500mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Amdyvir 500mg Tablet, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidney or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
What are the serious side effects of Amdyvir 500mg Tablet?
Serious side effects are rare, but if you experience them, you should seek medical advice right away.
These rare side effects include hives, blistering or peeling rash, yellow skin or eyes, unusual bruising or bleeding, loss of consciousness, fits, difficulty in breathing, hallucinations and swelling of the face, tongue, lips or throat.
=

Will Amecuf BR Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amecuf BR Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Amedox 200 Tablet DT safe to use?
Amedox 200 Tablet DT is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Amedox 200 Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amedox 200 Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
Amedox 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Amedox 200 Tablet DT an antibiotic?
Yes, Amedox 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Amedox 200 Tablet DT cause constipation?
Yes, Amedox 200 Tablet DT may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Amedox 200 Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amedox 200 Tablet DT before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Amedox 200 Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Amedox 200 Tablet DT starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Amedox 200 Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Amedox 200 Tablet DT treat UTI?
Yes, Amedox 200 Tablet DT may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Amedox 200 Tablet DT.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

Can the use of Amendo 500 Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Amendo 500 Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Therefore, during the initial phase of treatment, avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights, or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how this medicine affects you.
Will the use of Amendo 500 Tablet affect my fertility?
Amendo 500 Tablet is not known to affect fertility in males or females.
However, talk to your doctor if you are facing fertility issues during the treatment with this medicine.
I have gained weight since I started taking Amendo 500 Tablet.
Is it because of Amendo 500 Tablet? What should I do?
Weight gain is an uncommon side effect of Amendo 500 Tablet.
However, the response may vary from person to person.
To prevent weight gain you should take a healthy balanced diet, avoid snacking, cut down on high-calorie food items, include more vegetables and fruits in your diet, and exercise regularly.
If you still have issues with your weight, consult your doctor.
How long does Amendo 500 Tablet take to show its effect?
Amendo 500 Tablet may take a few weeks to start working properly since the dose is increased slowly.
Your seizures may continue until Amendo 500 Tablet starts working completely.
For how long do I need to take Amendo 500 Tablet?
You should continue to take Amendo 500 Tablet for as long as your doctor advises you to.
Do not stop taking it suddenly because this may increase the frequency of seizures which may be difficult to control.
Will I get addicted to Amendo 500 Tablet if I use it for a long time?
No, Amendo 500 Tablet is not habit-forming.
No physical or psychological dependence has been reported with Amendo 500 Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you experience any side effects.
What symptoms can occur if someone takes an excess of Amendo 500 Tablet?
Taking an excess of Amendo 500 Tablet may cause sleepiness, agitation, aggression, a decrease of alertness, inhibition of breathing, and even a state of coma.
In case of an overdose, immediate medical care should be provided to the patient in a nearby hospital.
=

Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet?
Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amentoclav 875mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Ameox 25mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Ameox 25mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Ameox 25mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Ameox 25mg Tablet?
Ameox 25mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Ameox 25mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Ameox 25mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Ameox 25mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Ameox 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Ameox 25mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Ameox 25mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Ameox 25mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Ameox 25mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Ameox 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

What does Amesti 100mg Capsule do for acne?
Amesti 100mg Capsule belongs to tetracycline class of medicine.
It treats the infection by preventing the growth and spread of bacteria.
It kills the acne-causing bacteria, which infect pores.
It also decreases certain natural oily substance that causes acne.
Can I take Amesti 100mg Capsule during pregnancy?
Amesti 100mg Capsule should be avoided during pregnancy as it may cause harm to your unborn baby.
Using the medicine during the last half of pregnancy may cause permanent discolouration of teeth and underdevelopment of tooth enamel.
Discuss with your doctor for any further query.
What should I avoid while on Amesti 100mg Capsule?
Amesti 100mg Capsule may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
Avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight.
It is advised to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen.
Furthermore, avoid alcohol while on Amesti 100mg Capsule as it may increase risk of liver toxicity.
Can Amesti 100mg Capsule get you high?
No, Amesti 100mg Capsule is not known to get anyone high.
It does not cause dependence either physical or psychological.
Also, it does not have any abuse potential.
Does Amesti 100mg Capsule affect contraception?
Amesti 100mg Capsule reduces the effectiveness of oral birth control pills.
Therefore, one should use other methods of contraception while on treatment with Amesti 100mg Capsule.
Discuss with your doctor if you are not sure.
Does Amesti 100mg Capsule cause dizziness?
Yes, Amesti 100mg Capsule may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, visual disturbances, ringing in the ears, and a feeling of spinning (vertigo).
If you experience any of these symptoms avoid driving or operating machinery.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR?
Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR?
The use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Ameto-G 2 Forte Tablet PR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

Can I drink alcohol while taking Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER?
No, it is not safe to drink alcohol while using Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER.
Drinking alcohol may lower your blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
Also, it can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
What should I inform the doctor before taking Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER?
Before taking Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER inform your doctor if you have congestive heart failure, kidney problems, liver problems, swelling of the back of the eye.
Inform the doctor if you are pregnant, breastfeeding or a premenopausal woman.
Let the doctor know if you are taking any prescription and non-prescription medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements.
Can the use of Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER can cause vitamin B12 deficiency as it contains metformin in it.
On long-term use, it interferes with absorption of vitamin B12 in the stomach.
Can the use of Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your meal, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always carry some sugary item like a candy or chocolate with you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ameto-GP2 Forte Tablet ER?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

For how long can Amexel 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amexel 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amexel 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amexel 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amexel 250mg Injection administered?
Amexel 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amexel 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amexel 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amexel 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amexel 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amexel 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amexel 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amexel 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amexel 250mg Injection?
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amexosyn Dry Syrup?
Amexosyn Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amexosyn Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amexosyn Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amexosyn Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amexosyn Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amexosyn Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is Amfenac 100mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Amfenac 100mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Amfenac 100mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Amfenac 100mg Tablet get you high?
No, Amfenac 100mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Amfenac 100mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Amfenac 100mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Amfenac 100mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Amfenac 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Amfenac 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Amfenac 100mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Amfenac 100mg Tablet can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amfirst AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Is Amfy Gel fungistatic or fungicidal?
Amfy Gel is fungicidal in nature, which means it acts by killing the fungus.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Amfy Gel?
Before starting treatment with Amfy Gel, tell your doctor if you have any other health problems, like kidney or liver-related issues.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are planning a baby, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Before using Amfy Gel, clean and dry the affected area.
Gently and thoroughly massage it into the skin.
Be careful not to get the medication in your eyes or mouth.
If Amfy Gel gets in your eyes accidentally, wash with plenty of water and call your doctor if your eyes are irritated.
What precautions do I need to take while using Amfy Gel?
Be careful not to get Amfy Gel into your eyes or mouth.
If you happen to get it in your eyes, rinse off with plenty of water immediately and contact your doctor.
You must not use Amfy Gel if you are allergic to it or any of its ingredients.
Tell your doctor if you notice any allergic reaction while using it for the first time.
Inform your doctor if you are taking any medicines regularly, to prevent any allergic reaction with other medicines.
Do not cover the area being treated with Amfy Gel with a bandage, as this may increase absorption of this medicine and increase the side effects.
Do not use more than what is recommended to relieve your symptoms faster.
Using more than what is advised will only increase the side effects.
Let your doctor know if you are planning to conceive.
Pregnant and breastfeeding mothers should use Amfy Gel only if prescribed by the doctor.
What should I do if I forget to use Amfy Gel?
If you forget to use Amfy Gel, do not worry and continue using Amfy Gel as soon as you remember.
However, if you are not sure and have any other doubts, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop using Amfy Gel when I feel better?
No, do not stop using Amfy Gel without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

What is Amgest 100mg Injection and what is it used for?
Amgest 100mg Injection contains progesterone, which is a natural female sex hormone.
It is used to treat menstrual and pregnancy-related issues that are caused due to hormonal imbalance.
It is also prescribed along with estrogen as a part of hormonal replacement therapy for preventing endometrial hyperplasia (thickening of the lining of the uterus).
How and in what dose should I take Amgest 100mg Injection?
Amgest 100mg Injection is given as an injection into the muscle, by a doctor or nurse only.
The dose and duration are decided by your doctor, depending on your exact medical condition.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amgest 100mg Injection.
What are the common side effects which I can experience while taking Amgest 100mg Injection?
The common side effects associated with Amgest 100mg Injection are local injection site reactions (redness, pain, or swelling), nausea, vaginal discharge, weight changes, jaundice, mental depression, and fever.
If any of these side effects bother you, please consult with your doctor.
Does Amgest 100mg Injection cause weight gain?
Yes, the use of Amgest 100mg Injection may cause weight gain.
The weight gain may be due to water retention and may not be a serious sign.
However, contact your doctor in case your weight gain is worrying you.
How is Amgest 100mg Injection beneficial for fertility and pregnancy?
Amgest 100mg Injection is a crucial hormone for fertility.
It is the hormone secreted by the ovaries that helps prepare the uterus for pregnancy and maintain it.
This is given as a medicine in cases of infertility to support the uterus in preparing itself for the pregnancy and to prevent abortions in some cases.
It is also used to prevent premature labor.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Amgrap T Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Amgrap T Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Amgrap T Syrup?
Amgrap T Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Amgrap T Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Amgrap T Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amgrap T Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Does Amiard 100mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amiard 100mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amiard 100mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amiard 100mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amiard 100mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amiard 100mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amiard 100mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amiard 100mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amiard 100mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amiard 100mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amiard 100mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amiard 100mg Tablet?
You should not take Amiard 100mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amiard 100mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amiard 100mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amiard 100mg Tablet?
Suddenly stopping Amiard 100mg Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amiard 100mg Tablet.
=

What is Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet?
Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Norfloxacin and Tinidazole.
This medication is used to treat diarrhea and dysentry caused due to infection.
They work by killing the harmful microorganisms that cause infection.
Together they help to treat infection more effectively.
Can I stop taking Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet increase the risk of tendon rupture?
Yes, Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of tendon rupture commonly in the achilles tendon.
Tendon problems can happen in people of all ages who take Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet.
Inform your health care provider if you hear or feel a snap or pop, have severe pain, rapid or immediate bruising after an accident, and are unable to use the affected arm or leg.
This may indicate that you have a tendon rupture.
Can the use of Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet cause metallic taste?
Yes, Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet can cause a temporary metallic taste.
This metallic taste can be reduced by chewing sugar-free gum or mints, brushing teeth after the meals and by staying hydrated.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet?
The use of Amibex TZ 400mg/600mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to norfloxacin or tinidazole or any other excipient present in the medicine.
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of tendinitis (inflammation of the tendons) or tendon rupture caused because of the use of ciprofloxacin or any other medicine which belongs to the quinolone group of antimicrobial agents.
It is also avoided in patients with some neurological disorders.
=

For how long can Amica 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amica 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amica 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amica 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amica 500mg Injection administered?
Amica 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amica 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amica 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amica 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amica 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amica 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amica 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amica 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amica 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amica 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amica 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

For how long can Amican 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amican 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amican 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amican 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amican 250mg Injection administered?
Amican 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amican 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amican 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amican 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amican 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amican 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

What if I overdose my child by mistake?
A single extra dose of Amicef 125mg Tablet DT is unlikely to do any harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Amicef 125mg Tablet DT to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Can Amicef 125mg Tablet DT cause any serious side effects?
Yes, Amicef 125mg Tablet DT may rarely cause some serious side effects.
These may include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, severe diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
If your child develops any such unwanted effects, consult your child’s doctor.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amicef 125mg Tablet DT?
Amicef 125mg Tablet DT can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amicef 125mg Tablet DT.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amicef 125mg Tablet DT?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Can Amicef 125mg Tablet DT impact my child’s digestion?
Amicef 125mg Tablet DT is an antibiotic and its use may affect or compromise the good bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract, thereby increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child experiences diarrhea while being on treatment with Amicef 125mg Tablet DT, do not abruptly stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
=

For how long can Amicin 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amicin 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amicin 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amicin 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amicin 100mg Injection administered?
Amicin 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amicin 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amicin 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amicin 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amicin 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

For how long can Amick 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amick 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amick 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amick 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amick 500mg Injection administered?
Amick 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amick 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amick 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amick 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amick 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amick 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amick 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amick 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amick 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amick 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amick 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

Amico 1500mcg Injection is a form of vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient which is required by the body to make red blood cells and maintain a healthy nervous system.
It is also important for releasing energy from food and using vitamin B11 (folic acid).
Why can’t I get sufficient vitamin B12 in my diet?
You can get vitamin B12 from sources like meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
While people who are vegetarian or vegan may not get Vitamin B12 as it is not found naturally in foods such as fruits, vegetables and grains.
Therefore, deficiency of Vitamin B12 is usually noticed in vegetarians or vegans.
What happens if I have vitamin B12 deficiency?
Deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause tiredness, weakness, constipation, loss of appetite, weight loss and megaloblastic anemia (a condition when red blood cells become larger than normal).
It may also lead to nerve problems such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.
Other symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency may include problems with balance, depression, confusion, dementia, poor memory and soreness of the mouth or tongue.
Amico 1500mcg Injection is generally well tolerated and considered safe.
However, in some cases, rare side effects may be observed such as nausea, diarrhea, anorexia and rash.
Discontinue taking this medicine immediately if a rash occurs.
How should Amico 1500mcg Injection be given?
Amico 1500mcg Injection can be injected directly into a vein (intravenously) or into a muscle (intramuscularly).
The usual dose is 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Amico 1500mcg Injection) and is given 3 times a week.
After 2 months, 1 ampoule (0.5 mg of Amico 1500mcg Injection) is given every one to three months as a part of maintenance therapy.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amicon 10 Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amicon 10 Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amicon 10 Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amicon 10 Tablet?
Amicon 10 Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amicon 10 Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amicon 10 Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amicon 10 Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amicon 10 Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amicon 10 Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amicon 10 Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amicon 10 Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amicon 10 Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amicon 10 Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

For how long can Amicos 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amicos 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amicos 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amicos 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amicos 500mg Injection administered?
Amicos 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amicos 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amicos 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amicos 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amicos 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

What is Amic T 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Amic T 500mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Tranexamic Acid and Mefenamic Acid.
This medication is used to treat pain and is used to treat heavy bleeding during menstrual cycle (monthly periods) in women.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Amic T 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, it is considered to be harmful for patients with severe kidney failure, active intravascular clotting (obstruction in the blood flow due to blood clots), and color vision disorders.
What is the recommended storage condition for Amic T 500mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Does Amide 25 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amide 25 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amide 25 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amide 25 Tablet do to the brain?
Amide 25 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amide 25 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amide 25 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amide 25 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amide 25 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amide 25 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amide 25 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amide 25 Tablet?
You should not take Amide 25 Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amide 25 Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amidolin-AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amidolin-AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amidolin-AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amidolin-AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amidolin-AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amidolin-AT Tablet?
Amidolin-AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amidolin-AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amidolin-AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amidolin-AT Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amidolin-AT Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

For how long can Amidox 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amidox 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amidox 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amidox 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amidox 250mg Injection administered?
Amidox 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amidox 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amidox 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amidox 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amidox 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amidox 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amidox 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amidox 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amidox 250mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amifab 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amifab 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amifab 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amifab 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amifab 250mg Injection administered?
Amifab 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amifab 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amifab 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amifab 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amifab 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amifab 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Does Amifide 100mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amifide 100mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amifide 100mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amifide 100mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amifide 100mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amifide 100mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amifide 100mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amifide 100mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amifide 100mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amifide 100mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amifide 100mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amifree 25 Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amifree 25 Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amifree 25 Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amifree 25 Tablet?
Amifree 25 Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amifree 25 Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amifree 25 Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amifree 25 Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amifree 25 Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amifree 25 Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amifree 25 Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amifree 25 Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

Does Amigal 200mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amigal 200mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amigal 200mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amigal 200mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amigal 200mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amigal 200mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amigal 200mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amigal 200mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amigal 200mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amigal 200mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amigal 200mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amigal 200mg Tablet?
You should not take Amigal 200mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amigal 200mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
=

Does Amigold 100 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amigold 100 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amigold 100 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amigold 100 Tablet do to the brain?
Amigold 100 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amigold 100 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amigold 100 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amigold 100 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amigold 100 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amigold 100 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amigold 100 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amigold 100 Tablet?
You should not take Amigold 100 Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amigold 100 Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amigold 100 Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
=

Does Amigress 50mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amigress 50mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amigress 50mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amigress 50mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amigress 50mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amigress 50mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amigress 50mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amigress 50mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amigress 50mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amigress 50mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amigress 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amijos 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amijos 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amijos 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amijos 10mg Tablet?
Amijos 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amijos 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amijos 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amijos 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amijos 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amijos 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amijos 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amijos 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

For how long can Amikable 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikable 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikable 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikable 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikable 100mg Injection administered?
Amikable 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikable 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikable 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikable 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikable 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikable 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amikad 500 Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikad 500 Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikad 500 Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikad 500 Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikad 500 Injection administered?
Amikad 500 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikad 500 Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikad 500 Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikad 500 Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikad 500 Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikad 500 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikad 500 Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikad 500 Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikad 500 Injection?
=

For how long can Amikamac 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikamac 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikamac 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikamac 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikamac 250mg Injection administered?
Amikamac 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikamac 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikamac 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikamac 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikamac 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikamac 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikamac 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikamac 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikamac 250mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amikamac 250mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amikamac 250mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

For how long can Amikanex 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikanex 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikanex 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikanex 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikanex 500mg Injection administered?
Amikanex 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikanex 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikanex 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikanex 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikanex 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikanex 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amikant 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikant 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikant 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikant 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikant 500mg Injection administered?
Amikant 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikant 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikant 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikant 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikant 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikant 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikant 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikant 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikant 500mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amikasarb 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikasarb 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikasarb 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikasarb 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikasarb 100mg Injection administered?
Amikasarb 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikasarb 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikasarb 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikasarb 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikasarb 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikasarb 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikasarb 100mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikasarb 100mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikasarb 100mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amikasarb 100mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amikasarb 100mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

For how long can Amikatil 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikatil 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikatil 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikatil 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikatil 100mg Injection administered?
Amikatil 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikatil 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikatil 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikatil 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikatil 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikatil 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikatil 100mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikatil 100mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikatil 100mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amikax 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikax 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikax 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikax 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikax 500mg Injection administered?
Amikax 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikax 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikax 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikax 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikax 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikax 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amiken 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amiken 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amiken 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amiken 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amiken 100mg Injection administered?
Amiken 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amiken 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amiken 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amiken 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amiken 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amiken 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amikogod 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikogod 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikogod 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikogod 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikogod 250mg Injection administered?
Amikogod 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikogod 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikogod 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikogod 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikogod 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikogod 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikogod 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikogod 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikogod 250mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amikos 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikos 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikos 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikos 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikos 250mg Injection administered?
Amikos 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikos 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikos 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikos 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikos 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikos 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amikos 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amikos 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amikos 250mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amikure 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amikure 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amikure 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amikure 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amikure 100mg Injection administered?
Amikure 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amikure 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amikure 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amikure 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amikure 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amikure 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

How often should you use Amilafin 0.25% Cream?
Amilafin 0.25% Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
Is Amilafin 0.25% Cream a steroid?
No, Amilafin 0.25% Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amilafin 0.25% Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amilafin 0.25% Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amilafin 0.25% Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amilafin 0.25% Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amilafin 0.25% Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amilift 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amilift 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amilift 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amilift 10mg Tablet?
Amilift 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amilift 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amilift 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amilift 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amilift 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amilift 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amilift 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amilift 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amilift 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amilift 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amilite 75mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amilite 75mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amilite 75mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amilite 75mg Tablet?
Amilite 75mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amilite 75mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amilite 75mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amilite 75mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amilite 75mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amilite 75mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amilite 75mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amilite 75mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

Does Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR make you sleepy?
Yes, Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR do to the brain?
Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR.
Can I stop taking Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR?
You should not take Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
Is Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR addictive?
No, there is no evidence to say that Amilyst 200mg Tablet SR causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
=

For how long can Amimag 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amimag 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amimag 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amimag 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amimag 100mg Injection administered?
Amimag 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amimag 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amimag 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amimag 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amimag 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amimag 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Are there any important warnings associated with use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet?
During the first few months of treatment, Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet may increase suicidal thoughts or actions in some patients.
Patients having mood or behavioral disorder have a high risk of developing suicidal thoughts and actions.
You should pay close attention and report your doctor of any such behavior or mood changes.
Make sure that you visit the doctor for the scheduled follow-up appointments.
Can I stop taking Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, you should continue to take Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet, even if you feel well.
If you stop Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal symptoms may occur.
Consult your doctor if the symptoms are relieved, he might decrease your dose gradually.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
Can the use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Amimax-H 12.5mg/5mg Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly caused problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while having sex.
If you experience these problems, discuss with your doctor.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET if I feel well?
No, keep using AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET?
AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET cause headache?
Yes, the use of AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET?
Yes, the use of AMIN-A 5MG/50MG TABLET can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

For how long can Amine 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amine 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amine 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amine 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amine 500mg Injection administered?
Amine 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amine 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amine 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amine 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amine 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amine 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amine 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amine 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amine 500mg Injection?
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Aminex AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Aminogen Eye Drop is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aminogen Eye Drop too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
I feel better now, can I stop using Aminogen Eye Drop?
No, you should not stop using Aminogen Eye Drop suddenly without talking to your doctor.
This is because your symptoms may worsen and your infection may return.
You may experience improvement in your symptoms before the infection is completely cleared.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration to ensure better results.
Stopping the medication too early could allow the spread of the infection and hence prevent complete healing.
In which conditions is the use of Aminogen Eye Drop avoided?
Use of Aminogen Eye Drop should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Aminogen Eye Drop or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Aminogen Eye Drop for the first time, consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aminogen Eye Drop?
Keep Aminogen Eye Drop in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Aminophylline 250mg Injection a steroid/ an antibiotic?
Aminophylline 250mg Injection is not a steroid or antibiotic, it belongs to xanthine derivatives class of medications
Aminophylline is a complex of theophylline and ethylenediamine
Does Aminophylline 250mg Injection cause dyspnea/ diuresis/ bradycardia/ tachycardia?
Aminophylline 250mg Injection is known to cause dyspnea, diuresis or tachycardia.
However, it does not cause bradycardia.
=

Does Amiodar 100 Tablet affect blood pressure?
Heart rate may decrease markedly in elderly patients.
Patients receiving hepatitis C medicines with amiodarone may suffer from symptoms of bradycardia and heart block.
In such cases, the seek urgent medical advice.
What does Amiodar 100 Tablet do to the heart?
Amiodar 100 Tablet blocks certain electrical signals in the heart that can cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).
This way, it helps to restore normal heart rhythm and maintains a regular, steady heartbeat.
What are the warning signals of liver toxicity caused by Amiodar 100 Tablet?
The warning signals of liver toxicity include yellowing of the skin or eyes (jaundice), tiredness, nausea, vomiting, dark-colored urine, pale-colored stools, loss of appetite, stomach pain or high temperature.
Contact your doctor immediately if you experience these symptoms.
Amiodar 100 Tablet is generally safe to use.
However, you should take it in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
It may cause some side effects that are temporary and usually resolve on their own.
Your doctor will tell you ways to cope up with them.
What kind of vision problems occur with Amiodar 100 Tablet?
You may experience blurred vision or see a circle around dazzling light (halos).
It may also make your eyes dry or sensitive to light.
It can even cause permanent blindness.
Therefore, consult your doctor in case you experience any such problems while on Amiodar 100 Tablet.
=

Does Amipace 200 Tablet affect blood pressure?
Heart rate may decrease markedly in elderly patients.
Patients receiving hepatitis C medicines with amiodarone may suffer from symptoms of bradycardia and heart block.
In such cases, the seek urgent medical advice.
What does Amipace 200 Tablet do to the heart?
Amipace 200 Tablet blocks certain electrical signals in the heart that can cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia).
This way, it helps to restore normal heart rhythm and maintains a regular, steady heartbeat.
What are the warning signals of liver toxicity caused by Amipace 200 Tablet?
The warning signals of liver toxicity include yellowing of the skin or eyes (jaundice), tiredness, nausea, vomiting, dark-colored urine, pale-colored stools, loss of appetite, stomach pain or high temperature.
Contact your doctor immediately if you experience these symptoms.
Amipace 200 Tablet is generally safe to use.
However, you should take it in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
It may cause some side effects that are temporary and usually resolve on their own.
Your doctor will tell you ways to cope up with them.
What kind of vision problems occur with Amipace 200 Tablet?
You may experience blurred vision or see a circle around dazzling light (halos).
It may also make your eyes dry or sensitive to light.
It can even cause permanent blindness.
Therefore, consult your doctor in case you experience any such problems while on Amipace 200 Tablet.
=

Is Amiphos 500mg Injection FDA approved?
Yes, it is FDA an approved drug
What is Amiphos 500mg Injection used for?
Amiphos 500mg Injection is used to reduce toxicity to kidneys associated with cisplatin therapy in patients with advanced ovarian cancer, and in prevention of dry mouth (xerostomia) during radiotherapy for head and neck cancer
How does Amiphos 500mg Injection work?
It protects the normal cells against the harmful effects of chemotherapy medications and radiation treatment by producing a chemical ‘thiol' that binds to and detoxifies the harmful compounds produced by cisplatin.
=

Are there any important warnings associated with use of Amipox-H Tablet?
During the first few months of treatment, Amipox-H Tablet may increase suicidal thoughts or actions in some patients.
Patients having mood or behavioral disorder have a high risk of developing suicidal thoughts and actions.
You should pay close attention and report your doctor of any such behavior or mood changes.
Make sure that you visit the doctor for the scheduled follow-up appointments.
Can I stop taking Amipox-H Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, you should continue to take Amipox-H Tablet, even if you feel well.
If you stop Amipox-H Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal symptoms may occur.
Consult your doctor if the symptoms are relieved, he might decrease your dose gradually.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Amipox-H Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Amipox-H Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amipox-H Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amipox-H Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Amipox-H Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
Can the use of Amipox-H Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Amipox-H Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly caused problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while having sex.
If you experience these problems, discuss with your doctor.
=

Does Amipride 200mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amipride 200mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amipride 200mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amipride 200mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amipride 200mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amipride 200mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amipride 200mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amipride 200mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amipride 200mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amipride 200mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amipride 200mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amipride 200mg Tablet?
You should not take Amipride 200mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amipride 200mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amipride 200mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amipride 200mg Tablet?
Suddenly stopping Amipride 200mg Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amipride 200mg Tablet.
=

How long should you use Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash?
The duration of use of Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash will depend on the condition it is being prescribed for.
If you are using it for gum disease (gingivitis) it may be used for a month.
If being used for mouth ulcers and thrush, this mouthwash may be used till 2 days after the symptoms are relieved.
Does Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash stain teeth?
Yes, though it does not occur in everyone, Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash may stain your teeth and tongue.
Staining is not permanent and may disappear after discontinuation of treatment.
Brushing the teeth with regular toothpaste before using Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash can prevent staining.
You should also avoid tannin-containing food and drinks such as tea and coffee.
Does Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash help bad breath?
Yes, Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash is effective in reducing bad breath, which persists for about 3 hours.
However, the risk of staining teeth and alteration of taste should be borne in mind before you start using it.
How should Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash be used?
It should be used as required.
It is generally used twice daily.
Rinse the mouth thoroughly for about 1 minute with 10 ml of Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash mouthwash.
After rinsing, expel it from your mouth.
What precautions should be followed while using Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash?
Using toothpastes immediately after the mouthwash may interfere with the working of mouthwash properly.
Use it before the mouthwash or at a different time of the day.
Always rinse your mouth before using the mouthwash.
How long should you use Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash?
The duration of use of Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash will depend on the condition it is being prescribed for.
If you are using it for gum disease (gingivitis) it may be used for a month.
If being used for mouth ulcers and thrush, this mouthwash may be used till 2 days after the symptoms are relieved.
Does Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash stain teeth?
Yes, though it does not occur in everyone, Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash may stain your teeth and tongue.
Staining is not permanent and may disappear after discontinuation of treatment.
Brushing the teeth with regular toothpaste before using Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash can prevent staining.
You should also avoid tannin-containing food and drinks such as tea and coffee.
Does Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash help bad breath?
Yes, Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash is effective in reducing bad breath, which persists for about 3 hours.
However, the risk of staining teeth and alteration of taste should be borne in mind before you start using it.
How should Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash be used?
It should be used as required.
It is generally used twice daily.
Rinse the mouth thoroughly for about 1 minute with 10 ml of Amiral 0.2% Mouth Wash mouthwash.
After rinsing, expel it from your mouth.
=

Does Amirex 50mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amirex 50mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amirex 50mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amirex 50mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amirex 50mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amirex 50mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amirex 50mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amirex 50mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amirex 50mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amirex 50mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amirex 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amirex 50mg Tablet?
You should not take Amirex 50mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amirex 50mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amirex 50mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
=

For how long can Amirix 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amirix 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amirix 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amirix 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amirix 250mg Injection administered?
Amirix 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amirix 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amirix 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amirix 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amirix 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amirix 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

What if I give too much of Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension by mistake?
Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension is unlikely to cause any harm if an extra dose is given by mistake.
However, if you think you have given too much of Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension?
Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which all lab tests should my child undergo while taking Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension on a long term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking medicines.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may too get affected.
Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension may kill off good bacteria along with the bad ones, increasing your child’s risk of developing other infections.
So, in case your child is having diarrhea while on Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Why is Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regimen advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Amirox 200mg Oral Suspension increases the risk of sunburn.
=

For how long can Amisac 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amisac 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amisac 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amisac 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amisac 500mg Injection administered?
Amisac 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amisac 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amisac 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amisac 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amisac 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amisac 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amisac 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amisac 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amisac 500mg Injection?
=

Does Amisant OD 400mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amisant OD 400mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amisant OD 400mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amisant OD 400mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amisant OD 400mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amisant OD 400mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amisant OD 400mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amisant OD 400mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amisant OD 400mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amisant OD 400mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amisant OD 400mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amisant OD 400mg Tablet?
You should not take Amisant OD 400mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amisant OD 400mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
Is Amisant OD 400mg Tablet addictive?
No, there is no evidence to say that Amisant OD 400mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amisant OD 400mg Tablet?
Suddenly stopping Amisant OD 400mg Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amisant OD 400mg Tablet.
=

Does Amiset 100mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amiset 100mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amiset 100mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amiset 100mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amiset 100mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amiset 100mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amiset 100mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amiset 100mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amiset 100mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amiset 100mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amiset 100mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amiset 100mg Tablet?
You should not take Amiset 100mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amiset 100mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amiset 100mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
=

For how long can Amisol 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amisol 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amisol 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amisol 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amisol 250mg Injection administered?
Amisol 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amisol 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amisol 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amisol 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amisol 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amisol 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amisol 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amisol 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amisol 250mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amistar 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amistar 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amistar 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amistar 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amistar 250mg Injection administered?
Amistar 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amistar 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amistar 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amistar 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amistar 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amistar 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amistar 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amistar 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amistar 250mg Injection?
=

What is Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Amist L 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

For how long can Amisun 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amisun 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amisun 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amisun 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amisun 500mg Injection administered?
Amisun 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amisun 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amisun 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amisun 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amisun 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amisun 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amisys 250mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amisys 250mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amisys 250mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amisys 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amisys 250mg Injection administered?
Amisys 250mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amisys 250mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amisys 250mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amisys 250mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amisys 250mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amisys 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amisys 250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amisys 250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amisys 250mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amisys 250mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amisys 250mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of AMIT 25 MG TABLET?
Antidepressants, including AMIT 25 MG TABLET, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of AMIT 25 MG TABLET and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with AMIT 25 MG TABLET?
AMIT 25 MG TABLET may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of AMIT 25 MG TABLET affect my sex life?
Yes, AMIT 25 MG TABLET can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking AMIT 25 MG TABLET for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, AMIT 25 MG TABLET takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking AMIT 25 MG TABLET, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can AMIT 25 MG TABLET cause urinary problems?
Yes, AMIT 25 MG TABLET can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

For how long can Amitax 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amitax 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amitax 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amitax 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amitax 500mg Injection administered?
Amitax 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amitax 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amitax 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amitax 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amitax 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amitax 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amitax 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amitax 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amitax 500mg Injection?
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amiter AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Are there any important warnings associated with use of Amitide Tablet?
During the first few months of treatment, Amitide Tablet may increase suicidal thoughts or actions in some patients.
Patients having mood or behavioral disorder have a high risk of developing suicidal thoughts and actions.
You should pay close attention and report your doctor of any such behavior or mood changes.
Make sure that you visit the doctor for the scheduled follow-up appointments.
Can I stop taking Amitide Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, you should continue to take Amitide Tablet, even if you feel well.
If you stop Amitide Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal symptoms may occur.
Consult your doctor if the symptoms are relieved, he might decrease your dose gradually.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Amitide Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Amitide Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amitide Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amitide Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Amitide Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
Can the use of Amitide Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Amitide Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly caused problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while having sex.
If you experience these problems, discuss with your doctor.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Amitide Tablet?
No, do not drink alcohol while you are taking Amitide Tablet.
Drinking alcohol can increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Amitide Tablet.
=

For how long can Amiton 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amiton 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amiton 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amiton 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amiton 100mg Injection administered?
Amiton 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amiton 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amiton 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amiton 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amiton 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

For how long can Amitop 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amitop 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amitop 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amitop 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amitop 100mg Injection administered?
Amitop 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amitop 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amitop 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amitop 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amitop 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amitop 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amitop 100mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amitop 100mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amitop 100mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amitop 100mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amitop 100mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitor 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitor 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitor 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitor 10mg Tablet?
Amitor 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitor 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitor 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitor 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitor 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitor 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitor 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitor 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amitor 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amitor 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitreat 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitreat 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitreat 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitreat 10mg Tablet?
Amitreat 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitreat 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitreat 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitreat 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitreat 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitreat 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitreat 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitreat 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amitreat 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amitreat 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitril 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitril 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitril 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitril 10mg Tablet?
Amitril 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitril 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitril 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitril 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitril 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitril 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitril 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitril 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amitril 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amitril 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitrip 50mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitrip 50mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitrip 50mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitrip 50mg Tablet?
Amitrip 50mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitrip 50mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitrip 50mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitrip 50mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitrip 50mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitrip 50mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitrip 50mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitrip 50mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

For how long can Amitru 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amitru 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amitru 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amitru 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amitru 100mg Injection administered?
Amitru 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amitru 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amitru 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amitru 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amitru 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amitru 100mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amitru 100mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amitru 100mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amitru 100mg Injection?
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitryp 10 Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitryp 10 Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitryp 10 Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitryp 10 Tablet?
Amitryp 10 Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitryp 10 Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitryp 10 Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitryp 10 Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitryp 10 Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitryp 10 Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitryp 10 Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitryp 10 Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amitwix 75mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amitwix 75mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amitwix 75mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amitwix 75mg Tablet?
Amitwix 75mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amitwix 75mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amitwix 75mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amitwix 75mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amitwix 75mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amitwix 75mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amitwix 75mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amitwix 75mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amitwix 75mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amitwix 75mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

Does Amival 100 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amival 100 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amival 100 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amival 100 Tablet do to the brain?
Amival 100 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amival 100 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amival 100 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amival 100 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amival 100 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amival 100 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amival 100 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
=

For how long can Amivay 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amivay 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amivay 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amivay 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amivay 500mg Injection administered?
Amivay 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amivay 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amivay 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amivay 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amivay 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amivay 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amivay 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amivay 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amivay 500mg Injection?
=

For how long can Amivis 250 Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amivis 250 Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amivis 250 Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amivis 250 Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amivis 250 Injection administered?
Amivis 250 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amivis 250 Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amivis 250 Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amivis 250 Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amivis 250 Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amivis 250 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amivis 250 Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amivis 250 Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amivis 250 Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amivis 250 Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amivis 250 Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

Does Amiwave 50 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amiwave 50 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amiwave 50 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amiwave 50 Tablet do to the brain?
Amiwave 50 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amiwave 50 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amiwave 50 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amiwave 50 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amiwave 50 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amiwave 50 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amiwave 50 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amiwave 50 Tablet?
You should not take Amiwave 50 Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amiwave 50 Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amiwave 50 Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amiwave 50 Tablet?
Suddenly stopping Amiwave 50 Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amiwave 50 Tablet.
=

For how long can Amiwin 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amiwin 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amiwin 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amiwin 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amiwin 500mg Injection administered?
Amiwin 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amiwin 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amiwin 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amiwin 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amiwin 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amiwin 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Are there any important warnings associated with use of Amixide 5 Tablet?
During the first few months of treatment, Amixide 5 Tablet may increase suicidal thoughts or actions in some patients.
Patients having mood or behavioral disorder have a high risk of developing suicidal thoughts and actions.
You should pay close attention and report your doctor of any such behavior or mood changes.
Make sure that you visit the doctor for the scheduled follow-up appointments.
Can I stop taking Amixide 5 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, you should continue to take Amixide 5 Tablet, even if you feel well.
If you stop Amixide 5 Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal symptoms may occur.
Consult your doctor if the symptoms are relieved, he might decrease your dose gradually.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Amixide 5 Tablet?
There are reports which suggest that the use of Amixide 5 Tablet can cause weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
An important to remember is that it is easier to prevent weight gain than losing increased weight.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amixide 5 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amixide 5 Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Amixide 5 Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
=

Can the use of Amizal 500 Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amizal 500 Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amizal 500 Capsule.
Amizal 500 Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amizal 500 Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amizal 500 Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amizal 500 Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amizal 500 Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amizal 500 Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amizal 500 Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amizal 500 Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amizal 500 Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amizal 500 Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amizal 500 Capsule.
=

For how long can Amizen 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amizen 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amizen 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amizen 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amizen 500mg Injection administered?
Amizen 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amizen 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amizen 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amizen 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amizen 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amizen 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amizen 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amizen 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amizen 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amizen 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amizen 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

Does Amizodine 50mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amizodine 50mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amizodine 50mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amizodine 50mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amizodine 50mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amizodine 50mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amizodine 50mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amizodine 50mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amizodine 50mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amizodine 50mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amizodine 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amizodine 50mg Tablet?
You should not take Amizodine 50mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amizodine 50mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
No, there is no evidence to say that Amizodine 50mg Tablet causes addiction.
Also, its use is not known to have any tendency for abuse.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Amizodine 50mg Tablet?
Suddenly stopping Amizodine 50mg Tablet may cause withdrawal symptoms which include nausea, vomiting, sweating, difficulty sleeping, extreme restlessness, muscle stiffness or abnormal movements, or your original condition may come back.
Therefore, it is advised to gradually reduce the dose of Amizodine 50mg Tablet.
=

For how long can Amk 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amk 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amk 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amk 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amk 500mg Injection administered?
Amk 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amk 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amk 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amk 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amk 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amk 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

For how long can Amkin 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amkin 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amkin 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amkin 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amkin 500mg Injection administered?
Amkin 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amkin 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amkin 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amkin 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amkin 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection?
Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection administered?
Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection?
The use of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amkrypnate 1000mg/200mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlead AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Amlevo 500mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Amlevo 500mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Amlevo 500mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Amlevo 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amlevo 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Amlevo 500mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amlevo 500mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Amlevo 500mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Amlevo 500mg Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Amlevo 500mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, the use of Amlevo 500mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle.
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Amlevo 500mg Tablet but it may be more significant in people above 60 years of age.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
=

What is the dosage of Amlimo 1mg Tablet?
The recommended starting dose of Amlimo 1mg Tablet is 1 mg or 2 mg once daily, administered with breakfast.
If you are at a higher risk of low blood sugar (e.g., the elderly or patients with renal impairment), you will be given a starting dose of 1 mg once daily.
The usual maintenance dose is 1–4 mg once daily.
The maximum recommended dose is 8 mg once daily.
After reaching a daily dose of 2 mg, the dosage will be increased not more than 2 mg at 1- to 2-week intervals, based on your blood glucose level.
Does Amlimo 1mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Amlimo 1mg Tablet itself does not cause sleepiness.
However, it may cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when used with other anti-diabetes medicine.
Because of this you may feel sleepy or have problems in sleeping.
Is Amlimo 1mg Tablet safe for kidneys?
Amlimo 1mg Tablet does not affect kidneys in patients with normal kidney function.
However, its use should be avoided in patients with severe kidney disease since Amlimo 1mg Tablet is principally eliminated by the kidneys.
Does Amlimo 1mg Tablet cause memory loss?
No, it is not known that Amlimo 1mg Tablet causes memory loss.
However, the use of Amlimo 1mg Tablet may cause low blood sugar which may cause problems with concentration and reduced alertness.
Who should not take Amlimo 1mg Tablet?
Amlimo 1mg Tablet should be avoided by patients who are allergic to it, have severe kidney or liver disease, have G6PD-deficiency (an inherited condition affecting red blood cells) or are due to have surgery.
Additionally, patients who are trying to get pregnant, are pregnant or breastfeeding, or have insulin-dependent diabetes (type 1 diabetes mellitus) should avoid taking Amlimo 1mg Tablet.
=

How long does it take for Amlip 10 Tablet to work?
Amlip 10 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlip 10 Tablet cause itching?
Amlip 10 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlip 10 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlip 10 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlip 10 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlip 10 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlip 10 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlip 10 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlip 10 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlip 10 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlip 10 Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlip 10 Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does it take for Amlo 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlo 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlo 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlo 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlo 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlo 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlo 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlo 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlo 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlo 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlo 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlo 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlo 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlo 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlobact AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking AMLOCAD-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET if my blood pressure is under control?
No, you should keep taking AMLOCAD-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled since your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Can I take other supplements for controlling my blood pressure along with AMLOCAD-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET?
No, you should not take other supplements for controlling blood pressure along with this medicine.
Always consult your doctor before taking any other medicine, supplement, or herbals while you are on this medicine.
I am experiencing nausea after starting treatment with AMLOCAD-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET.
Nausea is one of the common side effects of this medicine.
If you feel really sick, consult your doctor who may reduce the dosage or discontinue the medicine based on the severity of your condition.
Do not stop taking the medicine without consulting your doctor.
Also, eat smaller, more frequent meals to reduce the feeling of nausea.
Avoid food that is salty, spicy, fried, or fatty.
What vitals do I need to monitor while taking AMLOCAD-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET?
Your doctor will advise you to monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing, and oxygen levels closely while taking this medicine.
I am having trouble remembering to take my medications.
Is there anything I can do to help me remember?
In order to avoid missing a dose, use a calendar, pillbox, alarm clock, or cell phone alert to help you remember to take your medication.
You may also ask a family member or a friend to remind you or check in with you to be sure you are taking your medication.
=

How long does it take for Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet to work?
Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlo CB 2.5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does it take for Amloclass 10mg Tablet to work?
Amloclass 10mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amloclass 10mg Tablet cause itching?
Amloclass 10mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amloclass 10mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amloclass 10mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amloclass 10mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amloclass 10mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amloclass 10mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amloclass 10mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amloclass 10mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amloclass 10mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amloclass 10mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amloclass 10mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does it take for Amlocos 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlocos 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlocos 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlocos 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlocos 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlocos 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlocos 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlocos 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlocos 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlocos 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlocos 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlocos 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlocos 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlocos 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlodac AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlodac AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlodac AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlodac AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlodac AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlodac AT Tablet?
Amlodac AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlodac AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlodac AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlodac AT Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlodac AT Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet to work?
Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet cause itching?
Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlo-Dalcare 5 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlode-AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlode-AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlode-AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlode-AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlode-AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlode-AT Tablet?
Amlode-AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlode-AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlode-AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlode-AT Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlode-AT Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking AMLODIL-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET if my blood pressure is under control?
No, you should keep taking AMLODIL-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled since your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Can I take other supplements for controlling my blood pressure along with AMLODIL-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET?
No, you should not take other supplements for controlling blood pressure along with this medicine.
Always consult your doctor before taking any other medicine, supplement, or herbals while you are on this medicine.
I am experiencing nausea after starting treatment with AMLODIL-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET.
Nausea is one of the common side effects of this medicine.
If you feel really sick, consult your doctor who may reduce the dosage or discontinue the medicine based on the severity of your condition.
Do not stop taking the medicine without consulting your doctor.
Also, eat smaller, more frequent meals to reduce the feeling of nausea.
Avoid food that is salty, spicy, fried, or fatty.
What vitals do I need to monitor while taking AMLODIL-H 5MG/12.5MG TABLET?
Your doctor will advise you to monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing, and oxygen levels closely while taking this medicine.
I am having trouble remembering to take my medications.
Is there anything I can do to help me remember?
In order to avoid missing a dose, use a calendar, pillbox, alarm clock, or cell phone alert to help you remember to take your medication.
You may also ask a family member or a friend to remind you or check in with you to be sure you are taking your medication.
=

How long does it take for Amlodpin 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlodpin 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlodpin 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlodpin 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlodpin 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlodpin 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlodpin 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlodpin 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlodpin 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlodpin 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlodpin 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlodpin 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlodpin 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlodpin 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does it take for Amlofine 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlofine 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlofine 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlofine 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlofine 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlofine 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlofine 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlofine 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlofine 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlofine 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlofine 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlofine 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlofine 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlofine 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

What should I avoid while taking Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any of such symptoms contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure then you can consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet for a long time?
Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet for?
You may have to take Amlogard TM 40 mg/5 mg Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlogod AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlohil M 5mg/25mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amlokan 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlokan 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlokan 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlokan 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlokan 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlokan 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlokan 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlokan 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlokan 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlokan 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlokan 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlokan 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlokan 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlokan 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

Can I stop taking Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet?
Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlokem M 5/50 Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR?
Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR?
Yes, the use of Amlokind Beta 5mg/25mg Tablet PR can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlom 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
=

How long does it take for Amlomed 5mg Tablet to work?
Amlomed 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlomed 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlomed 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlomed 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlomed 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlomed 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlomed 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlomed 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlomed 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlomed 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlomed 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amlong 7.5mg Tablet to work?
Amlong 7.5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlong 7.5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlong 7.5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlong 7.5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlong 7.5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlong 7.5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlong 7.5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlong 7.5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlong 7.5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlong 7.5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlong 7.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlong 7.5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlong 7.5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

Can I stop taking Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR?
Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR?
Yes, the use of Amlong MT 50 Tablet PR can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlonite A 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amlop 2.5mg Tablet to work?
Amlop 2.5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlop 2.5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlop 2.5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlop 2.5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlop 2.5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlop 2.5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlop 2.5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlop 2.5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlop 2.5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlop 2.5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlop 2.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

How long does it take for Amlopin 5 Tablet to work?
Amlopin 5 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlopin 5 Tablet cause itching?
Amlopin 5 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlopin 5 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlopin 5 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlopin 5 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlopin 5 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlopin 5 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlopin 5 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlopin 5 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlopin 5 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

How long does it take for Amlopres 5 Tablet to work?
Amlopres 5 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlopres 5 Tablet cause itching?
Amlopres 5 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlopres 5 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlopres 5 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlopres 5 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlopres 5 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlopres 5 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlopres 5 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlopres 5 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlopres 5 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlopres 5 Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlopres 5 Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does it take for AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET to start working?
A substantial decrease in blood pressure can be experienced within 2 weeks of starting AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET.
The medicine may take up to 4 weeks to show its complete effects.
Talk to your doctor in case you have any concerns regarding AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET, but do not stop taking it without consulting the doctor.
Which medicine is considered safe for treating high blood pressure?
There are many blood pressure-lowering medicines which can be considered safe.
The doctor will advise the exact use of these medicines, keeping various factors such as age, gender, other coexisting diseases, etc.
Also, the effect of the medicine and response of the patient can vary from person to person.
For instance, a person below 55 years of age having no other co-existing disease may be prescribed angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARAs) (e.g., AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET, losartan, olmesartan) or Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors (e.g., ramipril, captopril or enalapril) by the doctor.
Is AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET bad for kidneys?
AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET does not generally affect the working of a proper functioning kidney.
However, there is limited data to support the safety of patients who have existing severe kidney impairment (creatinine clearance <10 ml/min) and are on dialysis.
Hence, AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET should be used cautiously in such patients.
It should only be used when advised by the doctor.
Who should not be given AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET?
AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET should not be given to patients who are allergic to it, have severe liver disease, have diabetes, or impaired kidney function.
Also, its use should be restricted if you are being treated with blood pressure lowering medicine containing Aliskiren.
In addition to that, AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET should not be used if you are pregnant or trying to conceive.
If you are not sure or have any queries, consult your doctor.
Does AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET cause weight gain?
No, AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET does not cause weight gain as a side effect.
However, if your kidney function deteriorates, your body may swell due to accumulation of water (fluid retention), resulting in weight gain.
Inform your doctor if you experience any unexplained weight gain or swelling in your feet, ankles or hands.
How long do I need to take AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET?
Continue taking AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET as long as your doctor has prescribed.
Do not stop taking it even if you start feeling better.
You may even have to take it lifelong, since AMLOPRES-VL 5MG/160MG TABLET does not cure high blood pressure or heart failure but controls them.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlord-AT Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlord-AT Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlord-AT Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlord-AT Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlord-AT Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlord-AT Tablet?
Amlord-AT Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlord-AT Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlord-AT Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amloril AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Can I use Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
It can cause injury and death to the baby.
If you conceive while taking Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet, stop taking the medicine and contact your doctor immediately.
The doctor might suggest other ways to lower blood pressure.
What lifestyle changes should I make while using Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet.
Stop smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce your risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlosafe 3D 80 Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amloser AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking Amloss-Beta Tablet PR if I feel well?
No, keep using Amloss-Beta Tablet PR as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amloss-Beta Tablet PR suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amloss-Beta Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amloss-Beta Tablet PR cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amloss-Beta Tablet PR can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amloss-Beta Tablet PR?
Amloss-Beta Tablet PR Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amloss-Beta Tablet PR?
Yes, the use of Amloss-Beta Tablet PR can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlosure AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlotec-AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlot M 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet to work?
Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet cause itching?
Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlotrust 2.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

How long does it take for Amlovas 10 Tablet to work?
Amlovas 10 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amlovas 10 Tablet cause itching?
Amlovas 10 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amlovas 10 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amlovas 10 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amlovas 10 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amlovas 10 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amlovas 10 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amlovas 10 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amlovas 10 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amlovas 10 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amlovas 10 Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amlovas 10 Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

Can I stop taking Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet Succinate is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to any of its active or inactive ingredient.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of asthma or lung disease.
Inform your doctor about the your medical history and medicines to avoid any side effects.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlovas XM 5mg/25mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlovib AT 5mg/10mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amloviz AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlowin AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How long does it take for Amloz 5 Tablet to work?
Amloz 5 Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amloz 5 Tablet cause itching?
Amloz 5 Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amloz 5 Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amloz 5 Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amloz 5 Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amloz 5 Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amloz 5 Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amloz 5 Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amloz 5 Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amloz 5 Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amloz 5 Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amloz 5 Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amlozen AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

How often should you use Amluck Cream?
Amluck Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Amluck Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amluck Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amluck Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amluck Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amluck Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amluck Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

Can the use of Ammox 500mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Ammox 500mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Ammox 500mg Capsule.
Ammox 500mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Ammox 500mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Ammox 500mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Ammox 500mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Ammox 500mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Ammox 500mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Ammox 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ammox 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Ammox 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Ammox 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Ammox 500mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Ammox 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Ammox 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Ammox 500mg Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

What is Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Thiocolchicoside.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
It relaxes the muscles by acting on the central nervous system and lowering chemical substance in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
Yes, Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhoea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can the Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet?
The use of Amnac T 100mg/8mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcer or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET if I feel well?
No, keep using AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET?
AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET cause headache?
Yes, the use of AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET?
Yes, the use of AMNEXT-AT 5MG/50MG TABLET can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amnop AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Is there anything I need to avoid while taking Amnuring P Tablet SR?
Amnuring P Tablet SR may impair your thinking or reactions.
Be careful while driving or doing an activity that requires you to be alert.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Amnuring P Tablet SR.
It can increase the effects of alcohol, which could be dangerous.
Grapefruit and grapefruit juice may also interact with this medicine and cause unwanted side effects.
Avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds.
Use of Amnuring P Tablet SR can make you more prone to sunburns.
Wear protective clothing and use sunscreen when you are outdoors during daytime.
How often should I see the doctor?
You may need to see your doctor regularly if you have started taking Amnuring P Tablet SR.
However, you must consult your doctor if the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or you experience some unwanted side effects that affect your routine activities.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amnuring P Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What is Amnuring P Tablet SR?
Amnuring P Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Amitriptyline.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
This medicine calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the patient's brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
Can I stop taking Amnuring P Tablet SR when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Amnuring P Tablet SR even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Amnuring P Tablet SR, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Amnuring P Tablet SR?
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amo AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What if I give too much of Amocef Oral Suspension by mistake?
An extra dose of Amocef Oral Suspension is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Amocef Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amocef Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amocef Oral Suspension?
Amocef Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amocef Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amocef Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amocef Oral Suspension on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Amocef Oral Suspension impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Amocef Oral Suspension may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Amocef Oral Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Amocef Oral Suspension lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
Yes, irregular treatment, repeated use,, and misuse of Amocef Oral Suspension can lead to resistance.
Resistant bacteria are no longer killed by the antibiotics and may lead to reinfection.
How long should I take Amocef Oral Suspension?
Amocef Oral Suspension is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoclavun 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What is Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection is a combination of two medicines.
It is used for the treatment of bacterial infections like tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infection.
Is it safe to use Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction, etc.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection administered?
Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection?
The use of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoctam G 1000mg/500mg Injection may take some time to show its full effect and treat your infection, be patient.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms during this time, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How long does Amodiff 250mg/250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amodiff 250mg/250mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amodiff 250mg/250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amodiff 250mg/250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

How often should you use Amofine 0.25% Cream?
Amofine 0.25% Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
Is Amofine 0.25% Cream a steroid?
No, Amofine 0.25% Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amofine 0.25% Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amofine 0.25% Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amofine 0.25% Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amofine 0.25% Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amofine 0.25% Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

Can the use of Amoflox 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoflox 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Amoflox 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amoflox 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Amoflox 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Amoflox 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Amoflox 200mg Tablet.
=

What is Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amogril CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amokly 625 Tablet?
Amokly 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Amokly 625 Tablet?
Amokly 625 Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Amokly 625 Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Amokly 625 Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amokly 625 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Amolin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
=

What is Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Amoliv M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

Can the use of Amolox 500mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amolox 500mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amolox 500mg Capsule.
Amolox 500mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amolox 500mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amolox 500mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amolox 500mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amolox 500mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amolox 500mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amolox 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amolox 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amolox 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amolox 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amolox 500mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Amolox 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amolox 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
=

Amoly Oral Drops is a combination of two medicines that help to relieve the symptoms of cold.
It consists of Chlorpheniramine, an antiallergic that relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing.
It also consists of Phenylephrine, a decongestant that narrows the small blood vessels providing relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Amoly Oral Drops?
Amoly Oral Drops is safe for most of the patients when taken according to the dose and duration recommended by the doctor.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, headache, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can the use of Amoly Oral Drops cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Amoly Oral Drops can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Amoly Oral Drops cause sleepiness or dizziness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Amoly Oral Drops is drowsiness.
Avoid driving, operating heavy machinery or engaging in other activities that need your full attention, unless your healthcare provider has permitted you to do so.
Do not drink alcohol or other cough and cold medicines.
Also, avoid taking medicines that help you sleep while taking Amoly Oral Drops as it may lead to excessive drowsiness.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoly Oral Drops can lead to increased side effects due to overdose.
Do not start, stop or change the dosage of your medicine before consulting your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Amoly Oral Drops?
The use of Amoly Oral Drops is considered to be harmful to patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medication.
Tell your healthcare provider about all your medical conditions such as heart disease, high blood pressure, hyperthyroidism, glaucoma and enlarged prostate (difficulty in urination) before taking Amoly Oral Drops.
=

For how long can Amon 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Amon 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Amon 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Amon 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Amon 500mg Injection administered?
Amon 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Amon 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Amon 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Amon 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amon 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Amon 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Amon 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amon 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Amon 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Amon 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Amon 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amonil CV Syrup?
Amonil CV Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amonil CV Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amonil CV Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amonil CV Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amonil CV Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amonil CV Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amonil CV Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amonil CV Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

How long does it take for Amopin 10mg Tablet to work?
Amopin 10mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amopin 10mg Tablet cause itching?
Amopin 10mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amopin 10mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amopin 10mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amopin 10mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amopin 10mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amopin 10mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amopin 10mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amopin 10mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amopin 10mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amopin 10mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amopin 10mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How does Amopred 125mg Injection work?
Amopred 125mg Injection works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Amopred 125mg Injection a steroid?
Yes, Amopred 125mg Injection is a steroid medicine also known as corticosteroids which occur naturally in the body.
These corticosteroids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Amopred 125mg Injection increases the levels of corticosteroids in the body by treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Amopred 125mg Injection used for?
Amopred 125mg Injection has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It is also helpful in treating autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage) and certain eye disorders.
How is Amopred 125mg Injection administered?
Amopred 125mg Injection should be administered by a doctor or under the supervision of a healthcare professional and should not be self-administered.
Usually, it is given into a muscle (intramuscular), joint (intra-articular), directly into a vein (direct intravenous), infusion or into the area being treated (soft tissue infiltration).
The doctor will decide the dose based on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Amopred 125mg Injection.
Is Amopred 125mg Injection better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Amopred 125mg Injection is more strong and efficient than Prednisone.
It stays in our body for a longer duration and is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
Does Amopred 125mg Injection cause weight gain?
Amopred 125mg Injection can cause weight gain especially when high doses taken for a long time or repeated short courses are taken.
Please consult your doctor if you experience weight gain after taking Amopred 125mg Injection.
=

How often should you use Amorfine Cream?
Amorfine Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Amorfine Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amorfine Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amorfine Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amorfine Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amorfine Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amorfine Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

How long does it take to clear the nail infection?
Amortas Cream takes a few days or weeks to clear up the infection.
Clearing up an infection refers to the improvement of the symptoms of the infection.
On the other hand, it may take at least 6 months to cure the fingernail infection and 9-12 months to cure toenails.
Curing of the infection takes longer because a nail infection gets cured only after the infected nail is naturally replaced by a new nail.
Can I stop taking Amortas Cream when my symptoms are relieved?
You may notice some improvement in your symptoms, but do not stop taking Amortas Cream before completing the full course of treatment, even if you feel better.
However, you must inform your doctor if the infection does not clear up even after 5 days of treatment.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amortas Cream?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoshlin CV Syrup?
Amoshlin CV Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoshlin CV Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoshlin CV Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amoshlin CV Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amoshlin CV Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amoshlin CV Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amoshlin CV Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amoshlin CV Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amotech CV Dry Syrup?
Amotech CV Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amotech CV Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amotech CV Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amotech CV Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amotech CV Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amotech CV Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amotech CV Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amotech CV Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup?
Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amotid Clav 200 mg/28.5 mg Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

How often should you use Amotru-XL Cream?
Amotru-XL Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Amotru-XL Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amotru-XL Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amotru-XL Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amotru-XL Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amotru-XL Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amotru-XL Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet?
Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a history of allergic reactions to any penicillin.
It is also avoided in patients with a previous history of cholestatic jaundice/liver dysfunction associated with the medicine.
Which is the best time to take Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet?
Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet may be taken every 8 hours or every 12 hours, depending on the dose prescribed by your doctor.
It should be taken with a meal or snack to reduce the possibility of getting an upset stomach.
If diarrhea is severe or lasts for more than 2 or 3 days, call your doctor.
Can I stop Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet in between if I feel better?
No, complete the course even if you feel better.
It is common to feel better early in the course of therapy.
However, skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may reduce the effectiveness of the immediate treatment.
It might also make the bacteria develop resistance against the treatment.
Can I take Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amowin-CV 625 LB Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Amox C 500mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amox C 500mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amox C 500mg Capsule.
Is Amox C 500mg Capsule safe?
Amox C 500mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amox C 500mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amox C 500mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amox C 500mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amox C 500mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amox C 500mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amox C 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amox C 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amox C 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amox C 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amox C 500mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Amox C 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amox C 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
=

Amoxent 1000 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxent 1000 Tablet?
Amoxent 1000 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet?
The use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxent 1000 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxent 1000 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxent 1000 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxent 1000 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxent 1000 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxent 1000 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxent 1000 Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Amoxent 1000 Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Amoxent 1000 Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
Can the use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxent 1000 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine as well and cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
Can I take Amoxent 1000 Tablet to treat cold and flu?
No, Amoxent 1000 Tablet does not treat a viral infection like the common cold or flu.
Consult your doctor and avoid self-medication.
Will Amoxent 1000 Tablet cause drowsiness?
No Amoxent 1000 Tablet does not cause drowsiness.
If you experience any such effects, consult your doctor.
=

Can the use of Amoxibal 250mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amoxibal 250mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxibal 250mg Capsule.
Amoxibal 250mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amoxibal 250mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amoxibal 250mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amoxibal 250mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amoxibal 250mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amoxibal 250mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amoxibal 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxibal 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amoxibal 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxibal 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amoxibal 250mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Amoxibal 250mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amoxibal 250mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
=

Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet?
Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet?
The use of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxible-CL 625 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxicure C 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can the use of Amoxil 250mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amoxil 250mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxil 250mg Capsule.
Amoxil 250mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amoxil 250mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amoxil 250mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amoxil 250mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amoxil 250mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amoxil 250mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amoxil 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxil 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amoxil 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxil 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amoxil 250mg Capsule.
=

What is Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxilin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

Can I give Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup?
Although rare, Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup?
Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
Is Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, do not give this medicine to your child in this case as a high percentage of children with infectious mononucleosis develop a skin rash (erythematous rash) while taking Amoxinga 125mg Dry Syrup.
=

What is Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxirut CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

How long does Amoxiva 250mg/250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxiva 250mg/250mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amoxiva 250mg/250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amoxiva 250mg/250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup?
Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amoxobic DS Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amoxolin LB 500mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet?
Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet?
Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet?
The use of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxsyn CV 375 Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can the use of Amoxy A Forte Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amoxy A Forte Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxy A Forte Capsule.
Is Amoxy A Forte Capsule safe?
Amoxy A Forte Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amoxy A Forte Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amoxy A Forte Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amoxy A Forte Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amoxy A Forte Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amoxy A Forte Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amoxy A Forte Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxy A Forte Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amoxy A Forte Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxy A Forte Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amoxy A Forte Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Amoxy A Forte Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amoxy A Forte Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxy A Forte Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

Can I give Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet?
Although rare, Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet?
Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxycillin 125mg Tablet?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxyclav DS Syrup?
Amoxyclav DS Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxyclav DS Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxyclav DS Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amoxyclav DS Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyclav DS Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amoxyclav DS Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amoxyclav DS Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amoxyclav DS Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

What is Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Amoxydic CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup?
Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amoxyfer CV DS Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Amoxylac Capsule as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Amoxylac Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amoxylac Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amoxylac Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amoxylac Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amoxylac Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amoxylac Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxyllin CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
=

What is Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxyn Clav 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What is Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxyril CV 250mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What is Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amoxystrong CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple?
Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple cause diarrhea?
Yes, Amoxytis CL 228.5 Oral Suspension Pineapple may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Can the use of Amozid 500 Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amozid 500 Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amozid 500 Capsule.
Amozid 500 Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amozid 500 Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Amozid 500 Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amozid 500 Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Amozid 500 Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amozid 500 Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amozid 500 Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amozid 500 Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amozid 500 Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amozid 500 Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amozid 500 Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Amozid 500 Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amozid 500 Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amozid 500 Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

Does Ampanel 4 Tablet have abuse potential?
Yes, Ampanel 4 Tablet has abuse potential in addition to its rewarding psychological or physiological effects.
If a patient has a history of drug abuse then monitoring for Ampanel 4 Tablet abuse should be done.
What are the most serious side effects of Ampanel 4 Tablet?
Ampanel 4 Tablet may cause some serious psychiatric and behavioral side effects such as aggression, hostility, irritability, anger, and suicidal and murderous thoughts.
What are the withdrawal symptoms of Ampanel 4 Tablet?
Ampanel 4 Tablet may cause physical dependence which means that suddenly stopping it may cause withdrawal symptoms which include anxiety, nervousness, irritability, fatigue, weakness, lethargy, mood swings, and sleeplessness.
Does Ampanel 4 Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Ampanel 4 Tablet may cause weight gain as a side effect of this medicine.
Consult your doctor if it bothers you.
What should I avoid while taking Ampanel 4 Tablet?
Ampanel 4 Tablet may cause sleepiness and dizziness, so alcohol consumption should be avoided as it may make you more sleepy and dizzy.
You should avoid driving and using heavy machinery until and unless you know how Ampanel 4 Tablet affects you.
You should also avoid getting pregnant and breastfeeding your baby.
Can I stop taking Ampanel 4 Tablet on my own?
No, you should not stop taking Ampanel 4 Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Sudden discontinuity of Ampanel 4 Tablet or significant dose reduction may cause occurrence of unpleasant effects.
=

What is Ampen 40mg Tablet used for?
Ampen 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Ampen 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Ampen 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Ampen 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Ampen 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Ampen 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Ampen 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Ampen 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Ampen 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Ampen 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Ampen 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Ampen 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Ampen 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Ampen 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Ampen 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
=

Is Amphodex 50mg Injection fungistatic or fungicidal?
Amphodex 50mg Injection is fungicidal in nature, it acts by killing the fungus
Is Amphodex 50mg Injection light sensitive?
Amphodex 50mg Injection is not light sensitive
What is Amphodex 50mg Injection liposomal?
Liposomal Amphodex 50mg Injection is a lipid-associated formulation.
Liposomal encapsulation or incorporation into a lipid complex of Amphodex 50mg Injection can substantially improves drug safety especially nephrotoxicity associated with the drug
Is Amphodex 50mg Injection an antibiotic?
Yes, Amphodex 50mg Injection is an antifungal antibiotic for the treatment of serious infections caused by fungi like fungal infections of one or more deep organs of the body, suspected fungal infections in patients with a raised temperature and neutropenia (reduced number of white blood cells [neutrophils]) and Visceral leishmaniasis (disease caused by a parasite)
Is Amphodex 50mg Injection testing dose needed?
Yes, administration of Amphodex 50mg Injection is associated with allergy (severe and serious allergic) reaction, therefore it is recommended to administer a test dose before starting the therapy to check for sensitivity
=

What is Amphy IBL Dry Syrup?
Amphy IBL Dry Syrup is a combination of two medicines.
It is used for the treatment of bacterial infections like tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infection.
Is it safe to use Amphy IBL Dry Syrup?
Amphy IBL Dry Syrup is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction, etc.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup?
The use of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amphy IBL Dry Syrup.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup can increase the risks of side effects.
Amphy IBL Dry Syrup may take some time to show its full effect and treat your infection, be patient.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms during this time, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amphy IBL Dry Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amphy IBL Dry Syrup when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amphy IBL Dry Syrup before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured, but the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Therefore, it is important to take this medicine for the duration advised by the doctor.
=

Does Ampicon 300 Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Ampicon 300 Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Ampicon 300 Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Ampicon 300 Tablet do to the brain?
Ampicon 300 Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Ampicon 300 Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Ampicon 300 Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Ampicon 300 Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Ampicon 300 Tablet.
Can I stop taking Ampicon 300 Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Ampicon 300 Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Ampicon 300 Tablet?
You should not take Ampicon 300 Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Ampicon 300 Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
=

Can the use of AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE.
AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE cause drowsiness?
No, AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE, please consult your doctor.
Can AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE takes to work?
Usually, AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE.
What if I don't get better after using AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking AMPIFIX 500MG CAPSULE when my symptoms are relieved?
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take AMPILAC KID TABLET as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of AMPILAC KID TABLET cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of AMPILAC KID TABLET can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does AMPILAC KID TABLET takes to work?
Usually, AMPILAC KID TABLET starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking AMPILAC KID TABLET when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking AMPILAC KID TABLET and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Ampiliv M Syrup by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Ampiliv M Syrup be stored?
Ampiliv M Syrup should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Ampiliv M Syrup make my child sleepy?
Ampiliv M Syrup causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Ampiliv M Syrup?
No, don’t start Ampiliv M Syrup without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Ampiliv M Syrup can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
=

How long does Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection used for?
Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin.
It is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Which medicines should be avoided while taking Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection?
Ampilon C 250mg/250mg Injection should be avoided with methotrexate which is used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancer.
=

How long does Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What is Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection used for?
Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection is used to treat patients with bacterial infections.
It is a semi-synthetic derivative of the drug penicillin and is used to treat urinary tract and respiratory tract infections, meningitis, gonorrhea and infections of the stomach or intestine.
Can I take Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection if I am allergic to penicillin?
If you have had an allergic reaction to one type of penicillin, you may get allergic to ampicillin or to some cephalosporins, but not necessarily.
Make sure you tell your doctor if you are allergic to penicillin.
Which are the medicines which can interact with Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection?
It is usually avoided in patients who are already taking methotrexate.
Methotrexate is a medicine used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and some forms of cancers.
Taking these two medicines together can cause some serious side effects.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ampilox 500 mg/500 mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the packet or container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is it safe to give Ampilox C Dry Syrup to children suffering from jaundice?
It is advised not to give Ampilox C Dry Syrup to children if they have jaundice.
The reason being, Ampilox C Dry Syrup contains an active ingredient called cloxacillin which can aggravate the symptoms of jaundice in your child.
Is Ampilox C Dry Syrup safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, it is not advised to give Ampilox C Dry Syrup if your child is suffering from infectious mononucleosis or even leukemia as Ampilox C Dry Syrup can lead to the development of skin rashes.
Can I give Ampilox C Dry Syrup to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Ampilox C Dry Syrup for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Moreover, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Ampilox C Dry Syrup can make the bacteria resistant.
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Ampilox C Dry Syrup to your child exactly as prescribed.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Ampilox C Dry Syrup?
Although rare, Ampilox C Dry Syrup may cause some serious side effects such as skin rash, allergy, superinfection, bleeding problems, seizures, and blood cell abnormalities.
In case your child develops any of these symptoms, consult the doctor at the earliest.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Ampilox C Dry Syrup?
Ampilox C Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Ampilox C Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
=

How much Ampimol M Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure safe and complete recovery of your child.
Can I change the dose of Ampimol M Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While an unnecessary increase in dose may lead to toxicity, a sudden lowering of the dosing may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
Can all children be given the same dose of Ampimol M Oral Suspension?
Ampimol M Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose based on the child’s age and body weight.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
The doctor may advise you to keep giving Ampimol M Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the illness.
You’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better gradually as the course approaches its end.
In case your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

Is Ampiod 200 Tablet DT safe to use?
Ampiod 200 Tablet DT is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Ampiod 200 Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ampiod 200 Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
Ampiod 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Ampiod 200 Tablet DT an antibiotic?
Yes, Ampiod 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Ampiod 200 Tablet DT cause constipation?
Yes, Ampiod 200 Tablet DT may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Ampiod 200 Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ampiod 200 Tablet DT before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Ampiod 200 Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Ampiod 200 Tablet DT starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Ampiod 200 Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Ampiod 200 Tablet DT treat UTI?
Yes, Ampiod 200 Tablet DT may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Ampiod 200 Tablet DT.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Ampiox Dry Syrup?
Ampiox Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Ampiox Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Ampiox Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Ampiox Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Ampiox Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Ampiox Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can the use of Ampiox Dry Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, Ampiox Dry Syrup may cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic that kills harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may also affect the helpful bacteria in your child’s stomach and cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, encourage your child to drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark-colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not give any other medicine to your child without consulting a doctor.
=

Can Ampise 250mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Ampise 250mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Ampise 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ampise 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Ampise 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Ampise 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Ampise 250mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Ampise 250mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Ampise 250mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Ampise 250mg Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

Ampitrust 750 Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Ampitrust 750 Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Ampitrust 750 Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Ampitrust 750 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ampitrust 750 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If you experience severe diarrhea, inform your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Ampitrust 750 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ampitrust 750 Tablet without talking to your doctor even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Ampitrust 750 Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Ampitrust 750 Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Who should not use Ampitrust 750 Tablet?
Use of Ampitrust 750 Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Ampitrust 750 Tablet or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Ampitrust 750 Tablet for the first time, consult your doctor.
=

Can I give Ampiz 125mg Tablet to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Ampiz 125mg Tablet for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Ampiz 125mg Tablet to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Ampiz 125mg Tablet can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Ampiz 125mg Tablet?
Although rare, Ampiz 125mg Tablet may cause some serious side effects such as skin rash, allergy, superinfection, bleeding problems, seizures, and blood cell abnormalities.
If your child experiences any such symptoms, consult the doctor at the earliest.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Ampiz 125mg Tablet?
Ampiz 125mg Tablet can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Ampiz 125mg Tablet.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Ampiz 125mg Tablet?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
=

How long does Amplus 125mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Amplus 125mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amplus 125mg/125mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amplus 125mg/125mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Ampola 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Is it safe to give Ampoxin Dry syrup to children suffering from jaundice?
It is advised not to give Ampoxin Dry syrup to children if they have jaundice.
The reason being, Ampoxin Dry syrup contains an active ingredient called cloxacillin which can aggravate the symptoms of jaundice in your child.
Is Ampoxin Dry syrup safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, it is not advised to give Ampoxin Dry syrup if your child is suffering from infectious mononucleosis or even leukemia as Ampoxin Dry syrup can lead to the development of skin rashes.
Can I give Ampoxin Dry syrup to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Ampoxin Dry syrup for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Moreover, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Ampoxin Dry syrup can make the bacteria resistant.
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Ampoxin Dry syrup to your child exactly as prescribed.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Ampoxin Dry syrup?
Although rare, Ampoxin Dry syrup may cause some serious side effects such as skin rash, allergy, superinfection, bleeding problems, seizures, and blood cell abnormalities.
In case your child develops any of these symptoms, consult the doctor at the earliest.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Ampoxin Dry syrup?
Ampoxin Dry syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Ampoxin Dry syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Ampoxin Dry syrup ?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
=

What is Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet?
Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Pregabalin and Methylcobalamin.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain, thereby decreasing the pain sensation.
It also helps in the regeneration of damaged nerves in the body.
Can I stop taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the use of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet?
Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals, avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may suddenly fall asleep during your daily activities.
Sometimes, you might not even feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while you are taking this medicine.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet?
Serious side effects caused because of the use of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet are uncommon and rare.
However, it may cause serious side effects like allergic reaction, suicidal thoughts or swelling of limbs (hands, legs or feet).
Stop taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet and contact your doctor if you have any signs of these serious side effects.
Signs of an allergic reaction include swelling of your face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue and neck.
Allergic reactions can also lead to trouble in breathing, skin rash, hives (raised bumps) or blisters.
Pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviors, thoughts or feelings, or if you have suicidal thoughts.
How long will the Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet take to act?
An initial benefit with Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months or more (in some patients) to see the full benefits.
What if I forget to take Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effects.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet?
No, do not drink alcohol while taking Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol can increase the severity of drowsiness or sleepiness caused by Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet.
How often should I see the doctor ?
You may need to see your doctor regularly if you have started to take Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet.
However, you must consult your doctor if the advised dosage of Ampreg M 1500mcg/75mg Tablet does not improve your symptoms or you continue experiencing some unwanted side effects that affect your routine activities.
=

Can the use of AMPS-Drota Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of AMPS-Drota Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can the use of AMPS-Drota Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of AMPS-Drota Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of AMPS-Drota Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of AMPS-Drota Tablet?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose of AMPS-Drota Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your pain or you continue experiencing increased severity of pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop taking AMPS-Drota Tablet when my pain is relieved?
AMPS-Drota Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your doctor told you to do so.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of AMPS-Drota Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can Ampurin 250mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Ampurin 250mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Ampurin 250mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ampurin 250mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Ampurin 250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Ampurin 250mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Ampurin 250mg Capsule.
What if I don't get better after using Ampurin 250mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Ampurin 250mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Ampurin 250mg Capsule and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amra AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amrap AT 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Should I take Amrif 400mg Tablet with food?
Yes, Amrif 400mg Tablet can be taken orally with or without food with a glass of water.
Take it as prescribed by your doctor for the exact period of time.
What does Amrif 400mg Tablet do for the liver?
In liver disease, there is an increased growth of bacteria in the intestine which increases the load of toxins travelling through the body.
This further increases the possibility of toxins reaching the brain which can cause abnormal brain function.
Amrif 400mg Tablet slows down the growth of bacteria in the gut, decreasing the symptoms in cases of liver disease.
Can Amrif 400mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Usually Amrif 400mg Tablet does not cause weight gain.
=

Amroclav 1.2 Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amroclav 1.2 Injection?
Amroclav 1.2 Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Amroclav 1.2 Injection administered?
Amroclav 1.2 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Amroclav 1.2 Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amroclav 1.2 Injection?
The use of Amroclav 1.2 Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amroclav 1.2 Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amroclav 1.2 Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amroclav 1.2 Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amroclav 1.2 Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amroclav 1.2 Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Amroclav 1.2 Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amroclav 1.2 Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

How often should you use Amrofast Cream?
Amrofast Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Amrofast Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amrofast Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amrofast Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amrofast Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amrofast Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amrofast Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

How often should you use Amrolfung 0.25% Cream?
Amrolfung 0.25% Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
Is Amrolfung 0.25% Cream a steroid?
No, Amrolfung 0.25% Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amrolfung 0.25% Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amrolfung 0.25% Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amrolfung 0.25% Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amrolfung 0.25% Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amrolfung 0.25% Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

How often should you use Amrolstar Cream?
Amrolstar Cream contains amorolfine which is an antifungal medicine.
It is used to treat fungal infections of the nails.
It is applied once weekly on the affected finger or toenails.
Sometimes your physician may ask you to apply it twice weekly.
The affected areas must be cleaned and dried properly.
Do not stop the treatment in between even if the symptoms heal.
Your doctor will recommend the exact dose and duration of the treatment based on the type of fungal infection.
No, Amrolstar Cream is not a steroid.
It is a medicine which is used to kill a wide variety of infection-causing fungus.
It is applied on the affected nails to treat fungal infections.
Can we apply Amrolstar Cream on other parts of the body?
No, this medicine should not be used on other parts of the body like the eyes, oral cavity, or intravaginally.
Its use should be restricted to only nails and skin.
Before using the medicine consult the doctor and follow the instructions carefully.
Can Amrolstar Cream cause any local reaction or rashes?
Yes, the use of Amrolstar Cream may cause allergic reactions, but the probability is unknown.
Such allergic reaction is not very common and is likely to occur in only susceptible or sensitive individuals.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience such reactions.
Is Amrolstar Cream safe to be used in kids?
No, Amrolstar Cream should not be used in children and infants.
This is because there is no evidence available to prove the safety of the medicine.
Consult your doctor in case your kid develops nail or skin infections or has any nail changes.
=

Can I give Amrox-LS Oral Drops to my child who is less than 6 years of age?
Yes, Amrox-LS Oral Drops is suitable to be given to the child who is between 2 to 6 years of age.
Your child’s doctor may prescribe the dose depending upon your child’s body weight.
What if my child takes too much Amrox-LS Oral Drops?
An overdose or a prolonged intake of Amrox-LS Oral Drops may cause serious side effects like seizures, rapid heart rate, excess salivation.
Make sure to give this medicine to your child strictly as per the prescribed dose, time, and way.
You must also ensure not to stop the medicine abruptly even if your child starts to feel better.
Sudden withdrawal of this medicine may worsen your child’s condition.
How should Amrox-LS Oral Drops be stored?
Amrox-LS Oral Drops should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any mishap.
My child has a severe cough.
Can I give him two cough medicines together?
Do not give your child more than one cough or cold medicine at a time unless advised by your child’s doctor.
In case of confusion, always consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I give my cough medicine to my child?
Never give your child the medicines that have been recommended for use by adults.
Children should only be given the medicines that have been formulated for them, else it may cause unwanted side effects.
Check the label of the medicine properly before giving it to your child.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Amrozol Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Amrozol Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Amrozol Syrup?
Amrozol Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Amrozol Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Amrozol Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amrozol Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Amsek P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What is Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension?
Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension is a combination of three medicines: Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol / Acetaminophen and Phenylephrine.
This combination helps to relieve symptoms of cold like runny nose, watery eyes, fever and headache.
It relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing.
Paracetamol blocks the release of certain chemical messengers in the brain that are responsible for pain and fever.
Phenylephrine is a decongestant which narrows the small blood vessels and provides relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension?
Yes, Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension is safe in most patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, sleepiness, headache and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform the doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension when I am relieved of my symptoms?
Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your symptoms are relieved.
However, continue taking this medicine if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension cause damage to liver?
Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension is usually safe when taken according to the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol, while taking this medicine as it may increase your risk of liver damage.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Amsi-Cold DS Oral Suspension?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet?
AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of AM Stat 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Does Amsyc 50mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amsyc 50mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amsyc 50mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amsyc 50mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amsyc 50mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amsyc 50mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amsyc 50mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amsyc 50mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amsyc 50mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amsyc 50mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amsyc 50mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amsyc 50mg Tablet?
You should not take Amsyc 50mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amsyc 50mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amtas AT F 5 mg/50 mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Does Amtaxel 20mg Injection cause weight gain?
Yes, Amtaxel 20mg Injection may cause weight gain.
It may occur due to fluid retention which may initially make your feet swell and then gradually it will spread to the whole body.
Call your doctor immediately if you notice swelling of feet.
How long do I have to take Amtaxel 20mg Injection?
You should continue to take Amtaxel 20mg Injection as long as your doctor advises you.
The duration of treatment varies with the type of cancer you have and other factors like your response to treatment.
You should usually receive your infusion once every 3 weeks.
Can I drink alcohol while on Amtaxel 20mg Injection?
Amtaxel 20mg Injection injection contains alcohol because of which you may experience confusion, stumbling, becoming very sleepy, or feeling like you are drunk.
This may impair your ability to drive or use machinery right after receiving it.
Hence, you should avoid alcohol during Amtaxel 20mg Injection therapy, as it may affect you adversely.
What is Amtaxel 20mg Injection used for?
Amtaxel 20mg Injection is commonly used for breast cancer, certain types of lung cancer, prostate, stomach, and head and neck cancers.
It works by restricting cells from growing and multiplying.
Is Amtaxel 20mg Injection available in pill form?
No, Amtaxel 20mg Injection injection comes as a liquid to be given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or clinic.
It is usually given over 1 hour once every 3 weeks.
=

What if I give too much of Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension by mistake?
Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension is unlikely to cause any harm if an extra dose is given by mistake.
However, if you think you have given too much of Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension?
Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which all lab tests should my child undergo while taking Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension on a long term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking medicines.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may too get affected.
Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension may kill off good bacteria along with the bad ones, increasing your child’s risk of developing other infections.
So, in case your child is having diarrhea while on Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Why is Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Amthro 200mg Oral Suspension is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regimen advised by your doctor.
=

Does Amtock 200mg Tablet make you sleepy?
Yes, Amtock 200mg Tablet may make you sleepy, drowsy, less alert, and may even blur your vision.
If you experience these symptoms you should not drive or operate heavy machinery.
When should I take Amtock 200mg Tablet?
The time of taking the medicine will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your dose.
Doses up to 300 mg can be taken anytime of the day but preferably at the same time each day.
Doses more than 300 mg can be taken half in the morning and half in the evening.
You can take the medicine during or between meals.
What does Amtock 200mg Tablet do to the brain?
Amtock 200mg Tablet belongs to antipsychotic class of medicines.
It acts against dopamine receptors in the brain.
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter which helps in regulating mood and behavior.
Schizophrenia is associated with an overactivity of dopamine in the brain, and this overactivity may cause delusions and hallucinations.
Amtock 200mg Tablet prevents this excessive activity of dopamine in the brain which helps in treating symptoms of schizophrenia.
Does Amtock 200mg Tablet help with anxiety?
No, there is no data to support the use of Amtock 200mg Tablet in the treatment of anxiety.
On the contrary, anxiety is a common side effect of Amtock 200mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Amtock 200mg Tablet after some time?
No, you should keep taking Amtock 200mg Tablet as long as your doctor has advised.
Do not stop the medication even if you feel better.
Stopping it suddenly may worsen your condition or symptoms may come back.
Talk to your doctor who will gradually reduce your dose.
Who should not take Amtock 200mg Tablet?
You should not take Amtock 200mg Tablet if you are under 15 years of age, allergic to it, have breast cancer or a tumor known as prolactinoma.
Avoid taking Amtock 200mg Tablet if you are breastfeeding, have tumor of adrenal glands (pheochromocytoma), or if you are taking certain medicines like levodopa, medicines to treat heart rhythm disorders, etc.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amtrex 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amtrex 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amtrex 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amtrex 10mg Tablet?
Amtrex 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amtrex 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amtrex 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amtrex 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amtrex 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amtrex 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amtrex 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amtrex 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amtrex 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amtrex 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

How quickly does Amtron 4mg Tablet work?
Amtron 4mg Tablet starts working within half an hour to 2 hours.
It dissolves rapidly into the bloodstream and starts showing its effect.
What are the side effects of Amtron 4mg Tablet?
The most common side effects of Amtron 4mg Tablet are constipation, diarrhea, fatigue and headache.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own after some time.
Consult your doctor if these persist or worry you.
When should you take Amtron 4mg Tablet?
Amtron 4mg Tablet should be taken with a full glass of water, with or without food.
It should be used exactly as per the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Usually, the first dose of Amtron 4mg Tablet is taken before the start of your surgery, chemotherapy or radiation treatment.
Is Amtron 4mg Tablet a steroid?
No, Amtron 4mg Tablet is an antiemetic and not a steroid.
Amtron 4mg Tablet is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
It is prescribed for the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting which is commonly observed after surgery or due to cancer chemotherapy.
Does Amtron 4mg Tablet work for seasickness?
No, Amtron 4mg Tablet does not work for seasickness.
This is because Amtron 4mg Tablet has very little effect on the nausea associated with motion sickness.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Amucoe 100mg Capsule?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Amucoe 100mg Capsule need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Amucoe 100mg Capsule, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Amucoe 100mg Capsule be taken?
Amucoe 100mg Capsule should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Amucoe 100mg Capsule?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Amucoe 100mg Capsule.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Amucoe 100mg Capsule be avoided?
Amucoe 100mg Capsule should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Amucoe 100mg Capsule, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Amucoe 100mg Capsule.
Is Amucoe 100mg Capsule the same as theophylline?
Amucoe 100mg Capsule comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Amucoe 100mg Capsule works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

Can the use of Amurol NX 250mg Tablet cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Amurol NX 250mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amurol NX 250mg Tablet.
Is Amurol NX 250mg Tablet safe?
Amurol NX 250mg Tablet is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Amurol NX 250mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
No, Amurol NX 250mg Tablet has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Amurol NX 250mg Tablet, please consult your doctor.
Can Amurol NX 250mg Tablet cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Amurol NX 250mg Tablet can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Amurol NX 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amurol NX 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Amurol NX 250mg Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Amurol NX 250mg Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Amurol NX 250mg Tablet.
What if I don't get better after using Amurol NX 250mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Amurol NX 250mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amurol NX 250mg Tablet and finish the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cleared.
=

How long does it take for Amvasc 10mg Tablet to work?
Amvasc 10mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Amvasc 10mg Tablet cause itching?
Amvasc 10mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Amvasc 10mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Amvasc 10mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Amvasc 10mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Amvasc 10mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Amvasc 10mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Amvasc 10mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Amvasc 10mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Amvasc 10mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Amvasc 10mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Amvasc 10mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

How long does Amvulac D 250mg/250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amvulac D 250mg/250mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amvulac D 250mg/250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amvulac D 250mg/250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet?
Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Amwel AT 2.5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Follow the directions given by the doctor or provided on the medicine.
Apply the medicine thinly and in sufficient quantity to cover the affected areas.
Amwisal Ointment is usually applied two or three times a day to the affected areas of skin.
Wash your hands after using Amwisal Ointment, unless it is used for treating skin infection on the hands.
Can I stop using Amwisal Ointment when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop using Amwisal Ointment and complete the full course of treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the disease is completely treated.
What are the precautions that need to be taken while using Amwisal Ointment?
Amwisal Ointment should not be used on the face.
Do not use the medication for longer than the advised periods of time.
Do not apply a bandage or dressing to the area being treated, as this will increase absorption of the preparation and increase the risk of side effects.
This medicine should only be used by the patient and never give it to other people, even if their condition appears to be the same.
Will Amwisal Ointment be more effective if taken more than prescribed?
No, Amwisal Ointment will not be more effective if overused.
Overusing the medicine can result in too much medicine being absorbed into the body.
This may lead to thinning or weakening of the skin and other serious side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Amwisal Ointment?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Amxone 1000mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Amxone 1000mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Amxone 1000mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Amxone 1000mg Injection?
Amxone 1000mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Amxone 1000mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Amxone 1000mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Amxone 1000mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Amxone 1000mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Amxone 1000mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Amxone 1000mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Amxone 1000mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

A-Mycin Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking A-Mycin Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of A-Mycin Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of A-Mycin Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can A-Mycin Tablet be taken at night?
A-Mycin Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take A-Mycin Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take A-Mycin Tablet to work?
A-Mycin Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is A-Mycin Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
A-Mycin Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking A-Mycin Tablet?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking A-Mycin Tablet should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of A-Mycin Tablet.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as A-Mycin Tablet increases the risk of sunburn.
Is A-Mycin Tablet a strong antibiotic?
A-Mycin Tablet is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, A-Mycin Tablet has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
Can you get a yeast infection from taking A-Mycin Tablet?
Some people may get a fungal or yeast infection known as thrush after taking A-Mycin Tablet.
Antibiotics such as A-Mycin Tablet can kill the normal or ‘good bacteria’ of your intestine responsible for preventing thrush.
You should inform your doctor if you get a sore or vaginal itching or discharge.
Also, inform your doctor if you get a white patch in the mouth or tongue after taking A-Mycin Tablet or soon after stopping it.
=

What is Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
Can Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause an allergic reaction?
Yes, Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause an allergic reaction.
It is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any signs of allergic reaction like hives, difficulty breathing, or swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat.
Can the use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
In addition to that, the medicine may affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine as well and cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less frequency of urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
Can I take Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet to treat cold and flu?
No, Amylib CV 500mg/125mg Tablet does not treat a viral infection like the common cold or flu.
Consult your doctor and avoid self-medication.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Amypress 10mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Amypress 10mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Amypress 10mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Amypress 10mg Tablet?
Amypress 10mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Amypress 10mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Amypress 10mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Amypress 10mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Amypress 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Amypress 10mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Amypress 10mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Amypress 10mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Amypress 10mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Amypress 10mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

How long does Amyvox 250mg/250mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Amyvox 250mg/250mg Capsule starts working soon after using it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Amyvox 250mg/250mg Capsule when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Amyvox 250mg/250mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Amzaris CV 250mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How long does it take for AMZEL 5MG TABLET to work?
AMZEL 5MG TABLET starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does AMZEL 5MG TABLET cause itching?
AMZEL 5MG TABLET may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is AMZEL 5MG TABLET bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that AMZEL 5MG TABLET causes deterioration of kidney problems.
AMZEL 5MG TABLET can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take AMZEL 5MG TABLET in the morning or at night?
AMZEL 5MG TABLET can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take AMZEL 5MG TABLET?
You should keep on taking AMZEL 5MG TABLET for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking AMZEL 5MG TABLET, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
=

What if I give too much of Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup?
Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Amzycef 50 Dry Syrup lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
=

Is Ana 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Ana 200mg Tablet is not an antibiotic, it belongs to the class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug) which helps in relieving pain associated with various disease conditions.
Can I take Ana 200mg Tablet with paracetamol?
Ana 200mg Tablet and paracetamol belong to the same class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drugs).
Taking the two medicines together is not advisable as it may increase the potential for gastric ulceration and bleeding.
However, please consult your doctor before using the two medicines together.
Does Ana 200mg Tablet contain aspirin?
Ana 200mg Tablet is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug).
Ana 200mg Tablet is safe to use if taken at prescribed dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Can I take Ana 200mg Tablet for headache?
Ana 200mg Tablet can be taken for a headache only when advised by your doctor.
Does Ana 200mg Tablet make you drowsy (feeling sleepy)?
Ana 200mg Tablet does not make you feel drowsy at prescribed doses.
However, an overdose of Ana 200mg Tablet can make you drowsy (feeling sleepy).
Does Ana 200mg Tablet contain sulphur?
No, Ana 200mg Tablet does not contain sulphur.
What does Ana 200mg Tablet treat or used for?
Ana 200mg Tablet is used to treat acute pain, painful osteoarthritis (degeneration of joints) and primary dysmenorrhea (painful menstruation) in adolescents and adults above 12 years old.
Can I take Ana 200mg Tablet with ibuprofen?
Ana 200mg Tablet can be taken with ibuprofen.
No drug-drug interactions have been reported between the two.
However, taking the two medicines together is not advisable as it may increase the potential for gastric ulceration and bleeding.
Please consult your doctor before taking the two medicines together.<br>
=

What if I give too much of Anacef Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Anacef Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Anacef Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Anacef Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Anacef Dry Syrup?
Anacef Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Anacef Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Anacef Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Anacef Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Anacef Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Anacef Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Anacef Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Anacef Dry Syrup lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
=

In what dose should I give Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT to my child?
The dose of Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT will be prescribed depending upon the kind of infection, its severity, and your child’s age and body weight.
Hence, altering it by yourself may cause side effects or make Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT ineffective.
In fact, if you give the medicine in the prescribed dose, time, and way, your child may start showing improvement after a few regular doses.
But, make sure to complete the full course without stopping the medicine abruptly as doing so may make your child sick again.
Also, the remaining bacteria might become resistant to the Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT.
Thus, following the prescribed treatment course is important and stressed upon for every medicine.
What if I give an overdose of Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT by mistake?
Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT is unlikely to cause any harm if an extra dose is given by mistake.
But, it is important to be careful because overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
So, if you think you have given too much of Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT to your child, it will be wise to speak to a doctor immediately.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include abnormal heart conduction (QT prolongation), allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Get in touch with your child’s doctor if he/she develops any of these symptoms.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT?
Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT ?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which all lab tests should my child undergo while taking Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT on a long term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests, liver function tests, and baseline ECG on a periodic basis to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT affect my child’s digestion?
Since children have a sensitive stomach, they may develop a stomach upset while taking medicines.
Moreover, taking antibiotics may kill off the good bacteria present in the digestive system along with the bad ones, increasing your child’s risk of developing stomach problems.
So, in case your child is having diarrhea while on Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
My child is suffering from a muscle weakness disorder.
Is it safe to give Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT?
Use Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT with caution in children with neuromuscular disorders like Myasthenia gravis as it may cause exacerbation of symptoms and even onset of some new symptoms.
How can the bacteria develop resistance against Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT?
Using Anaclar 125mg Tablet DT when your child does not need it will give the bacteria an opportunity to adapt to the medicine and develop ways to escape the medicine’s effects.
This will make the medicine ineffective when your child actually needs it.
Usually, when this happens, people say that the child has become resistant to the antibiotic, but in reality, it is the opposite.
It is actually the bacteria that have become resistant to the treatment.
=

Can the use of Anacomp D Syrup cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Yes, Anacomp D Syrup may make you feel drowsy or may cause you to fall asleep during your daily activities.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medicine affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such episodes while taking this medicine.
Can I breastfeed while taking Anacomp D Syrup?
No, it is not advisable to breastfeed while using Anacomp D Syrup.
This medicine contains Chlorpheniramine, an antihistamine, which can pass into the breast milk and may harm the baby.
Inform your doctor that you are breastfeeding if you are advised to take this medicine.
Will Anacomp D Syrup be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anacomp D Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Anadecon Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Caffeine, Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol and Phenylephrine.
This combination is helpful in relieving the symptoms of cold.
These symptoms may include body ache, headache, fatigue, fever, watery eyes, sneezing, cough, sore throat, and runny and stuffy nose.
Are there any foods which I have to avoid while taking Anadecon Tablet?
So, it is preferable to avoid medicines or food that contain caffeine.
Foods like coffee, tea, cola drinks and chocolate should be avoided as they may add to your total caffeine intake.
Increased caffeine intake can cause difficulty in sleeping, you may experience tremors and/or have chest discomfort.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol (beer, wine, etc.) while taking this medicine.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anadecon Tablet?
Store your medicines in a cool dry place and keep them in the original pack or container until it is time to take them.
Store them out of sight and reach of children.
Unused medicines should be disposed of in special ways to ensure that pets, children and other people cannot consume them.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Anadecon Tablet?
Serious side effects with Anadecon Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you notice allergic reactions, skin rash or peeling, mouth ulcers, breathing problems, unexplained bleeding, recurrent fevers or infections, vision disturbances, fast or irregular heartbeat.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Anadecon Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Anadecon Tablet?
It is not recommended to use Anadecon Tablet if you have high blood pressure (hypertension), any underlying serious heart condition or cardiovascular disorder, any history of stomach ulcers or overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism).
However, it can be taken if advised by the doctor.
Its use should also be avoided if you are taking antidepressant drugs.
These drugs, called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may include phenelzine and isocarboxazid or tricyclic antidepressants like imipramine and amitriptyline.
Can I breastfeed while taking Anadecon Tablet?
=

Can I stop taking Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet cause metallic taste?
Yes, Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet can cause a temporary metallic taste.
This metallic taste can be lowered by chewing sugar-free gum, mints and by brushing teeth after the meals.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet?
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet and for at least 3 days after stopping the medicine.
Drinking alcohol while taking this medicine may cause an unpleasant reaction (Disulfiram-like reaction) with symptoms like stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, headache, flushing or redness of the face.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anaerid-F 100mg/300mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Who should not use Anafil 600mg Tablet?
Use of Anafil 600mg Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Anafil 600mg Tablet or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Anafil 600mg Tablet for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Anafil 600mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Anafil 600mg Tablet, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like kidney or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Anafil 600mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Anafil 600mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Anafil 600mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can I stop taking Anafil 600mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anafil 600mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
How long does it take for malaria symptoms to show?
Symptoms of malaria can develop as quickly as 7 days after you are being bitten by an infected mosquito.
Typically, the time between being infected and the appearance of symptoms (incubation period) is 7 to 18 days.
However, in some cases it can take up to one year for the symptoms to develop.
Initial symptoms of malaria are flu-like which include feeling hot and shivery, muscle pains, vomiting, headaches and diarrhea.
=

What is Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Anaflam XP 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Anafortan Syrup cause damage to liver?
Very high doses of this medicine is known to harm the liver.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Anafortan Syrup?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Anafortan Syrup.
Drinking alcohol will increase the risk of serious side effects caused by Anafortan Syrup.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anafortan Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Anakast L 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Anakast L 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Anakast L 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Anakast L 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Anakast L 5mg Tablet to work?
Anakast L 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Anakast L 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Anakast L 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Anakast L 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Anakast L 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Anakast L 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Anakast L 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Anakast L 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Anakast L 5mg Tablet
=

Is it ok to take alcohol when taking Analiv 5mg Injection?
No, it is not recommended to take alcohol when on Analiv 5mg Injection.
It is a medicine given in cases of liver failure.
Although, there are no reported interaction.
Still, in cases of liver failure, alcohol should be avoided as it could worsen your complication of liver disease.
Analiv 5mg Injection is made up of two amino acids.
It is most commonly used in cases of liver diseases in order to prevent it from abnormal brain function called hepatic encephalopathy.
What is the use of Analiv 5mg Injection in the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy (HE)?
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a brain disorder which occurs in patients with liver failure.
In liver failure, there is increased bacterial growth in the intestine which leads to an accumulation of ammonia in blood.
This deteriorating condition of the liver starts affecting the functioning of the brain, causing Hepatic encephalopathy.
Analiv 5mg Injection works by detoxifying the ammonia from the blood, hence decreasing the free ammonia from the body.
This, as a result, helps decrease the abnormal functioning of the brain caused due to liver failure.
How is Analiv 5mg Injection given?
Analiv 5mg Injection can be given daily as an injection that is injected into the veins.
=

For how long can Anamika 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Anamika 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Anamika 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Anamika 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Anamika 500mg Injection administered?
Anamika 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Anamika 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Anamika 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Anamika 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anamika 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Anamika 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Anamika 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anamika 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Anamika 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Anamika 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Anamika 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

What if I vomit after taking Anapara 650mg Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Anapara 650mg Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Anapara 650mg Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Anapara 650mg Tablet.
How often can I take the Anapara 650mg Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Anapara 650mg Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Anapara 650mg Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Anapara 650mg Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Anapara 650mg Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Anapara 650mg Tablet safe for children?
Anapara 650mg Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
=

How much Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup?
Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
Can I give Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup is considered as an overdose?
You should only take four doses of Anapol 250mg/5ml Syrup in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
=

Does Anarzole 1mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Anarzole 1mg Tablet may cause weight gain, but it is not very common.
There could be other reasons as well which can lead to weight gain such as menopause.
However, if you gain weight while taking Anarzole 1mg Tablet, take low-calorie diet and exercise regularly.
Consult your doctor or a nutritionist to help you lose weight.
Does Anarzole 1mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Anarzole 1mg Tablet commonly affects the hair by making them thin which further leads to hair loss.
However, it does not occur in everyone.
Hair thinning probably occurs due to estrogen lowering effect of Anarzole 1mg Tablet.
These effects are not permanent and may revert after some time.
If it concerns you then talk to your doctor for another alternative medicine to avoid damage to hair.
Why do bodybuilders use Anarzole 1mg Tablet?
Bodybuilders who take anabolic steroids for bodybuilding take Anarzole 1mg Tablet to reduce the production of estrogen which is a side effect of anabolic steroids.
An increase in estrogen levels in bodybuilders may result in high pitched female voice, shrinking of the testicles or penis, and breast enlargement.
In order to avoid such characteristics bodybuilders take Anarzole 1mg Tablet.
Can Anarzole 1mg Tablet be taken at night?
Anarzole 1mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
You can take it with or without food.
Do not crush, break, or chew the tablet.
While on Anarzole 1mg Tablet how should patients be monitored?
While you are taking Anarzole 1mg Tablet your doctor will get blood tests done to check blood cell counts and investigate liver and kidney functions.
Along with that, the doctor may advise a bone scan if you are at risk for osteoporosis, which may also occur due to Anarzole 1mg Tablet treatment.
In what situations should I contact my doctor, while taking Anarzole 1mg Tablet?
You should contact your doctor if you experience any serious adverse reaction.
It is important to inform the doctor in case of prolonged or severe nausea or vomiting, extreme weakness, and extreme pain.
Along with that, consult your dotor if you have taken more than the recommended dose of Anarzole 1mg Tablet.
What is the most important information that I should know about Anarzole 1mg Tablet?
The most important information that you need to be aware of while using Anarzole 1mg Tablet is that it can cause heart disease.
Women who have early breast cancer and have blockage of arteries in the heart may have an increase in symptoms of decreased blood flow to their heart.
Seek help if you experience shortness of breath or have a new or worsening chest pain.
Which medicines should not be used with Anarzole 1mg Tablet?
Anarzole 1mg Tablet should not be used with tamoxifen as it may lower the effectiveness of Anarzole 1mg Tablet.
The working of Anarzole 1mg Tablet gets affected by medicines which contain estrogen such as birth control pills, estrogen creams, vaginal rings, and vaginal suppositories.
=

Does Anastra 1mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Anastra 1mg Tablet may cause weight gain, but it is not very common.
There could be other reasons as well which can lead to weight gain such as menopause.
However, if you gain weight while taking Anastra 1mg Tablet, take low-calorie diet and exercise regularly.
Consult your doctor or a nutritionist to help you lose weight.
Does Anastra 1mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Anastra 1mg Tablet commonly affects the hair by making them thin which further leads to hair loss.
However, it does not occur in everyone.
Hair thinning probably occurs due to estrogen lowering effect of Anastra 1mg Tablet.
These effects are not permanent and may revert after some time.
If it concerns you then talk to your doctor for another alternative medicine to avoid damage to hair.
Why do bodybuilders use Anastra 1mg Tablet?
Bodybuilders who take anabolic steroids for bodybuilding take Anastra 1mg Tablet to reduce the production of estrogen which is a side effect of anabolic steroids.
An increase in estrogen levels in bodybuilders may result in high pitched female voice, shrinking of the testicles or penis, and breast enlargement.
In order to avoid such characteristics bodybuilders take Anastra 1mg Tablet.
Can Anastra 1mg Tablet be taken at night?
Anastra 1mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
You can take it with or without food.
Do not crush, break, or chew the tablet.
While on Anastra 1mg Tablet how should patients be monitored?
While you are taking Anastra 1mg Tablet your doctor will get blood tests done to check blood cell counts and investigate liver and kidney functions.
Along with that, the doctor may advise a bone scan if you are at risk for osteoporosis, which may also occur due to Anastra 1mg Tablet treatment.
In what situations should I contact my doctor, while taking Anastra 1mg Tablet?
You should contact your doctor if you experience any serious adverse reaction.
It is important to inform the doctor in case of prolonged or severe nausea or vomiting, extreme weakness, and extreme pain.
Along with that, consult your dotor if you have taken more than the recommended dose of Anastra 1mg Tablet.
What is the most important information that I should know about Anastra 1mg Tablet?
The most important information that you need to be aware of while using Anastra 1mg Tablet is that it can cause heart disease.
Women who have early breast cancer and have blockage of arteries in the heart may have an increase in symptoms of decreased blood flow to their heart.
Seek help if you experience shortness of breath or have a new or worsening chest pain.
=

Is it safe to use Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet?
Yes, Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, constipation, weakness, dizziness, dryness in the mouth, sleepiness and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can I stop taking the medication when my pain is relieved?
Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet is usually recommended for short-term use and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, it is advisable that it should be taken only as suggested by your doctor.
Can the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about taking some medicines to treat constipation if this persists for a long time.
Can the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water on the bedside at night.
You may use some lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet is usually safe to use in the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, it may increase your risk of liver damage.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anatra 325 mg/37.5 mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects and liver damage.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can the use of Anavilda M500 Tablet lead to hypoglycemia?
The use of Anavilda M500 Tablet does not usually cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) alone.
But it could occur if there is insufficient supplementation of calories while taking this medicine.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
The symptoms are more likely to be noticed if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise, or take any other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar levels is important.
It is recommended to always carry glucose tablets, honey, or fruit juice with you.
Can the use of Anavilda M500 Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anavilda M500 Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark-colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anavilda M500 Tablet?
The use of Anavilda M500 Tablet should be avoided in patients with known allergies to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also considered to be harmful to patients with severe kidney impairment, liver impairment, congestive heart failure, lactic acidosis, or diabetic ketoacidosis.
What is the storage condition for the Anavilda M500 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
Anavilda M500 Tablet is a combination of two anti-diabetic drugs: Metformin and Vildagliptin.
Metformin is an anti-diabetic medicine and belongs to the class of biguanides.
It lowers the glucose production in the liver, delays glucose absorption from the intestines, and increases the body's sensitivity to insulin.
Vildagliptin inhibits the enzyme DPP4 inhibitor and increases the release of insulin from the pancreas.
This combination is not advised for patients below 18 years of age.
=

Take this medication by mouth, with or without food as directed by your doctor, usually once a day.
If you are consuming chewable tablets, chew thoroughly and then swallow.
Complete the full course of this medicine, even if symptoms disappear after a few days.
Is the use of Anaxime-CV Tablet contraindicated in patients with impaired renal function?
Anaxime-CV Tablet should be used with particular care in patients with severely impaired renal function.
Dose modification is advised for patients with moderate or severe renal impairment.
What are the precautions that need to be taken while taking Anaxime-CV Tablet?
The dose of Anaxime-CV Tablet should be adjusted in patients with impairment of kidneys and for those who have gastrointestinal disease or colitis.
What are the serious side effects associated with the use of Anaxime-CV Tablet?
The use of Anaxime-CV Tablet can also lead to serious side effects like severe stomach/abdominal pain, persistent nausea/vomiting, unusual tiredness, new signs of infection (e.g., persistent sore throat, fever), yellowing of eyes/skin, dark urine, easy bruising/bleeding, signs of kidney problems (such as change in the amount of urine) and mental/mood changes (such as confusion).
What all should I tell my doctor before starting the course of this medicine?
Please inform your doctor if you are pregnant or trying for a baby or breastfeeding before you start taking this medicine.
Let your doctor know if you are using any other medicine.
Can the use of Anaxime-CV Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anaxime-CV Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Anaxime-CV Tablet takes to work?
Usually, Anaxime-CV Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Anaxime-CV Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Anaxime-CV Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anaxime-CV Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anaxime-CV Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is it safe to use Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet?
Yes, Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, constipation, weakness, dizziness, dryness in the mouth, sleepiness and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication.
Can I stop taking the medication when my pain is relieved?
Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet is usually recommended for short-term use and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, it is advisable that it should be taken only as suggested by your doctor.
Can the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about taking some medicines to treat constipation if this persists for a long time.
Can the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water on the bedside at night.
You may use some lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet is usually safe to use in the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, it may increase your risk of liver damage.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anazac-P 500mg/37.5mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects and liver damage.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

How long does Anbid 250 Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Anbid 250 Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Anbid 250 Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Anbid 250 Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Anbid 250 Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Anbid 250 Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Anbid 250 Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Can Anbid 250 Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Anbid 250 Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

What if I don't get better after using Anca-V Suppository?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Anca-V Suppository when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anca-V Suppository and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anca-V Suppository?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How long should I take Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT?
Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT effective?
Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT?
If you forget a dose of Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
How long should I take Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT?
Ancef O 100mg Tablet DT is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Ancep 1000mg/500mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Cefoperazone and Sulbactam.
Cefoperazone is an antibiotic which works by preventing the formation of the bacterial protective covering which is essential for the survival of bacteria.
Sulbactam is a beta-lactamase inhibitor which reduces resistance and enhances the activity of Cefoperazone against bacteria.
How long does Ancep 1000mg/500mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Ancep 1000mg/500mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Ancep 1000mg/500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Ancer LM Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Ancer LM Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Ancer LM Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Ancer LM Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Ancer LM Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Ancer LM Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Ancer LM Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Ancer LM Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Ancer LM Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Ancer LM Tablet.
=

What if I vomit after taking Ancifev 650 Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Ancifev 650 Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Ancifev 650 Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Ancifev 650 Tablet.
How often can I take the Ancifev 650 Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Ancifev 650 Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Ancifev 650 Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Ancifev 650 Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Ancifev 650 Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Ancifev 650 Tablet safe for children?
Ancifev 650 Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
=

Is Anclof 100mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Anclof 100mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Anclof 100mg Tablet SR safe?
Anclof 100mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Anclof 100mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Anclof 100mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Anclof 100mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Anclof 100mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Anclof 100mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Anclof 100mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Anclof 100mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

Ancob 1500mcg Capsule contains vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient which is required by the body to make red blood cells and maintain a healthy nervous system.
It is also important for releasing energy from food and using vitamin B11 (folic acid).
Why can’t I get sufficient vitamin B12 from my diet?
You can get vitamin B12 from sources like meat, fish, eggs and dairy products.
While people who are vegetarian or vegan may not get Vitamin B12 as it is not found naturally in foods such as fruits, vegetables and grains.
Therefore, deficiency of Vitamin B12 is usually noticed in vegetarians or vegans.
What happens if I have vitamin B12 deficiency?
Deficiency of vitamin B12 may cause tiredness, weakness, constipation, loss of appetite, weight loss and megaloblastic anemia (a condition when red blood cells become larger in size than normal).
It may also lead to nerve problems such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.
Other symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency may include problems with balance, depression, confusion, dementia, poor memory and soreness of the mouth or tongue.
How should Ancob 1500mcg Capsule be taken?
Ancob 1500mcg Capsule should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
It can be taken with or without food.
However, it would be best to take it at the same time each day to avoid the chances of missing a dose.
What if I forget to take a dose of Ancob 1500mcg Capsule?
If you forget a dose of Ancob 1500mcg Capsule, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Ancob 1500mcg Capsule is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

How long do I need to take Ancoxib 60mg Tablet?
You need to take Ancoxib 60mg Tablet as long as your doctor recommends taking it.
For dental pain, it is usually prescribed for 3 days, but if it is being used for acute pain conditions then it should be given as long as the pain lasts and not exceeding 8 days.
Usually, for arthritis, it is prescribed for long-term use, which may vary from person to person.
How should Ancoxib 60mg Tablet be taken?
Take Ancoxib 60mg Tablet exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow it whole with a glass of water.
Ancoxib 60mg Tablet can be taken with or without food.
Taking the medicine without food can enhance the working of the medicine.
Furthermore, do not exceed the dose recommended by your doctor.
Does Ancoxib 60mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
In some patients Ancoxib 60mg Tablet causes sleepiness, feeling of spinning (vertigo), and dizziness.
If one experiences these symptoms then driving or operating machinery should be avoided.
Does Ancoxib 60mg Tablet have any effect on birth control pills?
Taking Ancoxib 60mg Tablet with birth control pills and hormonal replacement therapy may increase the chances of side effects.
Hence, consult the doctor who will suggest an alternative method of birth control.
Can I take aspirin while taking Ancoxib 60mg Tablet?
Aspirin can be taken in low doses when you are using it for the prevention of stroke and heart attack.
You should not stop low-dose aspirin without talking to your doctor.
It is advised that while taking Ancoxib 60mg Tablet you should not take high doses of aspirin and other anti-inflammatory medicines, as they may increase your risk of stomach ulcers.
How long does Ancoxib 60mg Tablet take to work?
Pain relief has been observed after about 4 hours of starting Ancoxib 60mg Tablet.
Full effect may take a little longer and may vary from person to person.
Is Ancoxib 60mg Tablet a painkiller?
Yes, Ancoxib 60mg Tablet is a pain killer.
It helps to reduce pain and inflammation in the joints and muscles due to osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and gout.
It is also used to relieve dental pain after dental surgery.
=

What is Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking a higher than recommended dose can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Andonac SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

How long does Andrecin Eye Ointment take to work?
Usually, Andrecin Eye Ointment starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Andrecin Eye Ointment?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Andrecin Eye Ointment when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Andrecin Eye Ointment and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Can Androfil 40mg Capsule be used for body building purpose?
No, Androfil 40mg Capsule should not be used for increasing muscle mass and physical ability in healthy individuals, as this may cause harmful effects when used inappropriately.
Also, in healthy individuals, if Androfil 40mg Capsule is given externally, it may cause hormonal imbalance.
How and in what dose should I take Androfil 40mg Capsule?
It is recommended to take this medicine with food.
The dose and duration for which you need to take this medicine is decided by your doctor depending on your exact medical condition.
Make sure to follow the doctor’s advice.
However, it is recommended to take it at the same time each day, to ensure consistent levels of medicine in the body.
What are the common side effects of using Androfil 40mg Capsule?
The common side effects are increased red blood cells, diarrhea, stomach pain or discomfort, leg pain, dizziness, increased sweating, headache, acne, breast pain, and gynecomastia.
If any of these side effects bother you, consult with the doctor.
Who should not take Androfil 40mg Capsule?
Androfil 40mg Capsule should not be given to men with breast cancer, prostate cancer and kidney disease.
It should be avoided in patients who had or presently have liver cancer and in those who have increased levels of calcium in blood.
It should not be used by females, children below 18 years, and elderly patients more than 65 years of age.
What are the major health risks associated with Androfil 40mg Capsule therapy?
The major health risks associated with the use of Androfil 40mg Capsule in men are heart attack, stroke, and prostatic carcinoma.
=

What is Androtas Gel and what it is used for?
Androtas Gel contains a synthetic form of testosterone (a male sex hormone).
It is used in the treatment of male hypogonadism (a condition in which the body does not produce enough testosterone).
How and in what dose should I take Androtas Gel?
Apply this medicine, onto clean, dry intact skin (preferably over abdomen or shoulders) once a day at the same time each day.
Rub the gel in gently with one finger until dry, and then cover the area with loose clothing (e.g.
After finishing, wash your hands with soap and water.
The dose of this medicine is decided by your doctor and make sure to follow it.
What are the few important things that I should know while taking this medicine?
This medicine, may be transferred from you to the other person from close skin to skin contact.
It might result in increase the testosterone levels in the other person.
The prolonged or repeated exposure may cause few side effects (excess hair growth, deep voice, menstrual irregularities in women).
To prevent this, cover the application site with the loose clothing once the gel has dried and always wash your hands with soap and water after applying it.
What are the common side effects of using Androtas Gel?
The most common side effect of using Androtas Gel is skin reactions at the site of application such as burning or prickling sensation, dryness, rash, redness or itchiness.
The other common side effects are increased body hair growth, increase in breast size, swelling of hands and feet and increase in blood pressure.
If any of these side effect bother you, please consult with your doctor.
Can Androtas Gel be used for body building purpose?
No, Androtas Gel should not be used for increasing muscle mass and physical ability in healthy individuals, as this may cause harmful effects when used inappropriately.
Also, in healthy individuals, if Androtas Gel is given externally, it may cause hormonal imbalance.
Who should not take Androtas Gel?
Androtas Gel should not be given to men with breast cancer, prostate cancer and kidney disease.
It should be avoided in patients who had or presently have liver cancer and in those who have increased levels of calcium in blood.
It should not be used by females, children below 18 years, and elderly patients more than 65 years of age.
Can Androtas Gel have any harmful effect if I am a diabetic?
Androtas Gel may decrease blood glucose levels, and therefore, the dose of antidiabetic medicines should be reduced.
Will there be a problem if I am taking warfarin and have started Androtas Gel?
You should get blood tests done more frequently for checking your bleeding time (time taken to stop bleeding) when you are taking warfarin along with Androtas Gel, especially when starting and stopping Androtas Gel.
Talk to your doctor for advice.
How long does it take for Androtas Gel to show its effects?
While some of the effects of Androtas Gel may start showing effects after 3 weeks, some may take longer.
For example, effect on sexual interest appears after 3 weeks, while changes in erections/ejaculations may take up to 6 months.
What are the major health risks associated with Androtas Gel therapy?
The major health risks associated with the use of Androtas Gel in men are heart attack, stroke, and prostatic carcinoma.
What is Androtas Gel and what is it used for?
Androtas Gel is an injectable preparation which contains a synthetic form of testosterone (a male sex hormone).
It is used in the treatment of male hypogonadism (a condition in which the body does not produce enough testosterone).
=

What is Andyrax 25mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Andyrax 25mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
Andyrax 25mg Tablet effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Andyrax 25mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does Andyrax 25mg Tablet work for allergies?
Andyrax 25mg Tablet works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of Andyrax 25mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Andyrax 25mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Andyrax 25mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Andyrax 25mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Andyrax 25mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Andyrax 25mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

Aneket 10mg Injection addiction can occur if the drug is taken multiple times and may develop either a mental or physical dependence on the drug effects
Is Aneket 10mg Injection an opiate/ narcotic/ stimulant/ controlled substance/ barbiturate?
Aneket 10mg Injection is a general anaesthetic and a controlled substance.
It is not an opiate, barbiturate narcotic or stimulant
Aneket 10mg Injection is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
Aneket 10mg Injection is dangerous if taken at high doses
Does Aneket 10mg Injection make you lose weight?
Aneket 10mg Injection can cause loss of appetite and weight loss.
=

Can you take Anerone 300mg Tablet SR every day?
Yes, Anerone 300mg Tablet SR can be taken every day.
It is usually prescribed to be taken once daily in the evening or at bedtime.
The usual duration of prescription may vary from 10-12 days a month to 25 days a month.
However, the number of days for which you will need to take this medicine in each cycle will be suggested by your doctor depending upon your health condition.
Does Anerone 300mg Tablet SR cause weight gain?
Yes, taking Anerone 300mg Tablet SR may cause weight gain.
The weight gain may be due to water retention and may not be a serious sign.
However, contact your doctor in case your weight gain is worrying you.
The risk of weight gain is generally less if Anerone 300mg Tablet SR is taken with estrogen as a combined pill.
But, do not start any hormonal therapy without consulting your doctor.
How is progesterone beneficial for fertility and pregnancy?
Progesterone is a very crucial hormone in fertility.
It is the hormone secreted by the ovaries that helps prepare the uterus for pregnancy and maintain it.
Anerone 300mg Tablet SR (form of progesterone) is given as a medicine in cases of infertility to support the uterus in preparing itself for the pregnancy and to prevent the abortions in some cases.
=

How should Anfoe 6000IU Injection be stored?
In the hospital, pre-filled syringes are stored unopened in a refrigerator between 2 and 8 ℃.
If you are using this medicine at home, it is important that the pre-filled syringe is stored in your refrigerator.
Do not store it in the freezer.
Allow the pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature prior to using it.
This usually takes between 15 and 30 minutes.
Anfoe 6000IU Injection pre-filled syringes that are being used or about to be used can be kept at room temperature (not above 25°C) for a maximum single period of 7 days.
Keep these pre-filled syringes away from children and protected from light.
What to do if you use too much Anfoe 6000IU Injection?
Tell the doctor or nurse immediately if you think too much Anfoe 6000IU Injection has been injected.
When should Anfoe 6000IU Injection not be used?
Anfoe 6000IU Injection should not be used if the solution is clouded or you can see particles floating in it or if the medicine has expired.
Refer to the expiry date on the label.
You should also not use the medicine if you know or think that it may have been accidentally frozen or if there has been a refrigerator failure.
Can Anfoe 6000IU Injection be used in children?
Yes, Anfoe 6000IU Injection is used to treat anemia caused due to chronic kidney disease in children who are above 1 year of age.
The effectiveness of Anfoe 6000IU Injection and side effects seen in children are similar to adults.
Can Anfoe 6000IU Injection affect blood pressure?
Yes, Anfoe 6000IU Injection can affect blood pressure.
During initial therapy with Anfoe 6000IU Injection, blood pressure should be monitored and those who have high blood pressure should take appropriate measures to control blood pressure.
Your doctor may stop Anfoe 6000IU Injection if the blood pressure remains uncontrolled.
=

How long does it take for Angicam 5mg Tablet to work?
Angicam 5mg Tablet starts working on the day it is taken.
However, it may take weeks to see the full effect.
You should continue taking the medicine even if you feel better or if you do not notice any considerable difference.
Consult your doctor if you have any concerns or you feel worse after taking the medicine.
Does Angicam 5mg Tablet cause itching?
Angicam 5mg Tablet may cause itching in some patients, though it is an uncommon side effect.
However, if you experience severe itching contact your doctor.
Is Angicam 5mg Tablet bad for the kidneys?
No, there is no evidence that Angicam 5mg Tablet causes deterioration of kidney problems.
Angicam 5mg Tablet can be used in normal doses in patients with kidney problems.
In fact, its blood pressure-lowering effect, it helps to prevent injury to the kidneys due to hypertension.
Should I take Angicam 5mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
Angicam 5mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Usually, it is advised to be taken in the morning, but your doctor may advise to take it in the evening as well.
You should take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it and consistent levels of medicine are maintained in the body.
For how long do I need to take Angicam 5mg Tablet?
You should keep on taking Angicam 5mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled.
If you stop taking Angicam 5mg Tablet, your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Is Angicam 5mg Tablet a beta-blocker?
No, Angicam 5mg Tablet is not a beta-blocker.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as calcium channel blockers.
It lowers blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can easily flow through the blood vessels.
=

What are the serious side effects of Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER?
Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER may cause changes in the electrical activity of the heart which is known as QT prolongation.
Your doctor may get regular tests done to check the electrical activity of your heart.
Tell your doctor right away if you feel faint, lightheaded or if your heart starts beating irregularly or fast, as these may be symptoms of QT prolongation.
Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER may also cause kidney failure in patients who already have kidney problems.
Therefore, your doctor may need to do tests to check how your kidneys are working.
I started taking Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER about a week ago.
Now I have noticed that my urine has become very dark though I am taking plenty of fluids.
Is there anything to worry about?
Urine discoloration could be because of Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER.
You need not worry if you do not have any other symptoms.
However, if it still bothers you, you can talk to your doctor who will advise you further.
In case I accidentally take an excess of Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER, what will happen?
Excess of Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER can cause nausea, vomiting, lightheadedness, double vision, tiredness, severe tremor, confusion, hallucinations, difficulty in speaking and walking and you can even faint.
If you have taken an excess of Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER by mistake, call your doctor right away or seek emergency medical care in a nearby hospital.
Is it safe to take Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER if I am already taking metoprolol?
Yes, it is safe to take the Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER and Metoprolol together.
Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER has minimal effect on blood pressure in patients with angina.
I am a diabetic and am taking metformin.
My doctor has prescribed Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER, is it safe to take both together?
If you are taking metformin along with Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER, you have to be careful since Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER may increase the levels of metformin in the body which can lead to metformin toxicity.
Talk to your doctor who will modify the dose of metformin.
I have been taking simvastatin to keep my cholesterol levels in check.
Can I take Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER with it?
It is recommended not to take simvastatin and Angicorn 500mg Tablet ER together because it may cause simvastatin toxicity which may lead to symptoms like muscle weakness and soreness, fatigue, decreased urination, etc.
Let your doctor know that you are already taking simvastatin.
If it is still necessary to take, then take it exactly as advised by the doctor.
=

Is Angifine 20mg Tablet SR a diuretic?
No, Angifine 20mg Tablet SR is not a diuretic medication.
However, some evidence indicates that Angifine 20mg Tablet SR has a partial diuretic property which may result in increased sodium loss through urine.
It is a medication which relaxes the blood vessels by directly acting on them.
This helps to decrease the blood pressure of the individual.
As a result, blood flows more easily and lowers blood pressure, which helps to reduce the strain or pressure on your heart.
Is Angifine 20mg Tablet SR bad for kidneys?
No, Angifine 20mg Tablet SR is not bad for kidneys.
In few research studies, taking Angifine 20mg Tablet SR in recommended doses has in fact been shown to be beneficial for the kidneys.
It is not advised to use this medicine without consulting the doctor.
It should be used exactly as prescribed.
Can Angifine 20mg Tablet SR cause liver damage?
Yes,Angifine 20mg Tablet SR can cause liver damage in some cases, but this is very rare.
However, some people may develop a rise in liver enzymes after taking Angifine 20mg Tablet SR.
Let your doctor know if you notice any such changes in your recent lab tests.
Do not start this medication without consulting your doctor and do inform him if you have any history of liver disease or liver damage.
This is because, in case of liver damage, dose adjustment may be required.
Does Angifine 20mg Tablet SR affect blood sugar?
No, Angifine 20mg Tablet SR does not cause any change in blood sugar levels.
It has been observed that Angifine 20mg Tablet SR has no effect on the release of insulin or change in blood sugar levels.
However, before starting the medicine, inform the doctor if you are diabetic.
This is done because the medicine for blood pressure is suggested accordingly when a patient is diabetic.
Can Angifine 20mg Tablet SR be used in pregnancy and nursing mothers?
It is advised that you should consult your doctor before taking this medicine if you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant or breastfeeding.
It should be used only if prescribed by the doctor in case of pregnancy.
Studies have shown significant risks to the developing baby and it is given only if the benefits are clearly more than the risks involved.
Does Angifine 20mg Tablet SR cause palpitations?
Angifine 20mg Tablet SR can cause palpitations as a side effect.
However, this is usually not bothersome and resolves as you continue with the treatment.
If the symptom persists for long, consult the doctor who will suggest the ways to prevent it.
=

Can I feel dizzy after taking Angilo 25mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Angilo 25mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly get up from a lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Is Angilo 25mg Tablet a good blood pressure medicine?
Angilo 25mg Tablet is used by many people for reducing blood pressure levels.
This medicine generally has very few side effects.
In addition to lowering blood pressure, it also protects kidney function in high blood pressure patients having diabetes and impaired kidney function (diabetic nephropathy).
It is also used to treat chronic heart failure when treatment with other medicines fails to prove effective.
It also helps to decrease the risk of stroke in patients who are hypertensive and have thicker left ventricle (heart chamber).
What are some of the lifestyle changes I should make while using Angilo 25mg Tablet?
Lifestyle changes play a major role in keeping you healthy if you are taking Angilo 25mg Tablet.
Avoid taking excess salt in your diet and find ways to reduce or manage stress in your life.
Practice yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also helps to reduce stress levels and helps to keep your blood pressure normal.
Stop smoking and alcohol consumption as this helps in lowering your blood pressure and preventing heart problems.
Exercise regularly and take a balanced diet that includes whole grains, fresh fruits, vegetables, and fat-free products.
Consult your doctor if you need any further guidance to get the maximum benefit of Angilo 25mg Tablet and to keep yourself healthy.
For how long do I need to take Angilo 25mg Tablet?
You may have to take Angilo 25mg Tablet for a long term, even life long.
Angilo 25mg Tablet only controls blood pressure but does not cure it.
Talk to your doctor in case you have any concerns regarding Angilo 25mg Tablet, but do not stop taking it without consulting the doctor.
Does Angilo 25mg Tablet cause weight gain?
No, Angilo 25mg Tablet does not cause weight gain.
However, if the medicine starts affecting your kidney function then your body may swell due to the accumulation of water, resulting in weight gain.
Call your doctor if you experience unexplained weight gain or swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands.
What are the long-term side effects of Angilo 25mg Tablet?
Long-term use of Angilo 25mg Tablet is generally considered to be safe.
However, in some cases, long-term use of Angilo 25mg Tablet may adversely affect the functioning of the kidneys.
Therefore, the doctor may prescribe regular blood tests to keep a track of how well the kidneys are working.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Angimed-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Angimed-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Angimed-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Angimed-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Anginac Cold Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol / Acetaminophen and Phenylephrine.
This combination helps to relieve symptoms of cold like runny nose, watery eyes, fever and headache.
It relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing.
Paracetamol blocks the release of certain chemical messengers in the brain that are responsible for pain and fever.
Phenylephrine is a decongestant which narrows the small blood vessels and provides relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Anginac Cold Syrup?
Yes, Anginac Cold Syrup is safe in most patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, sleepiness, headache and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform the doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can I stop taking Anginac Cold Syrup when I am relieved of my symptoms?
Anginac Cold Syrup is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your symptoms are relieved.
However, continue taking this medicine if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Anginac Cold Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anginac Cold Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Anginac Cold Syrup cause damage to liver?
Anginac Cold Syrup is usually safe when taken according to the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Anginac Cold Syrup can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol, while taking this medicine as it may increase your risk of liver damage.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Anginac Cold Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can I feel dizzy after taking Angio 50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Angio 50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly get up from a lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Is Angio 50mg Tablet a good blood pressure medicine?
Angio 50mg Tablet is used by many people for reducing blood pressure levels.
This medicine generally has very few side effects.
In addition to lowering blood pressure, it also protects kidney function in high blood pressure patients having diabetes and impaired kidney function (diabetic nephropathy).
It is also used to treat chronic heart failure when treatment with other medicines fails to prove effective.
It also helps to decrease the risk of stroke in patients who are hypertensive and have thicker left ventricle (heart chamber).
What are some of the lifestyle changes I should make while using Angio 50mg Tablet?
Lifestyle changes play a major role in keeping you healthy if you are taking Angio 50mg Tablet.
Avoid taking excess salt in your diet and find ways to reduce or manage stress in your life.
Practice yoga or meditation or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep every night as this also helps to reduce stress levels and helps to keep your blood pressure normal.
Stop smoking and alcohol consumption as this helps in lowering your blood pressure and preventing heart problems.
Exercise regularly and take a balanced diet that includes whole grains, fresh fruits, vegetables, and fat-free products.
Consult your doctor if you need any further guidance to get the maximum benefit of Angio 50mg Tablet and to keep yourself healthy.
For how long do I need to take Angio 50mg Tablet?
You may have to take Angio 50mg Tablet for a long term, even life long.
Angio 50mg Tablet only controls blood pressure but does not cure it.
Talk to your doctor in case you have any concerns regarding Angio 50mg Tablet, but do not stop taking it without consulting the doctor.
Does Angio 50mg Tablet cause weight gain?
No, Angio 50mg Tablet does not cause weight gain.
However, if the medicine starts affecting your kidney function then your body may swell due to the accumulation of water, resulting in weight gain.
Call your doctor if you experience unexplained weight gain or swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands.
What are the long-term side effects of Angio 50mg Tablet?
Long-term use of Angio 50mg Tablet is generally considered to be safe.
However, in some cases, long-term use of Angio 50mg Tablet may adversely affect the functioning of the kidneys.
Therefore, the doctor may prescribe regular blood tests to keep a track of how well the kidneys are working.
=

Are there any special instructions regarding storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Can I use Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
Its use can cause injury and death to the baby.
If you conceive while using Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet, stop using it and contact your doctor immediately.
Your doctor will recommend you other ways to lower the blood pressure.
What are some lifestyle changes to make while using Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Angio H 50mg/12.5mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
=

What is Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines that helps keep the blood pressure under control.
The medicine works by reducing the risk of strokes and myocardial infarction (heart attack), thereby treating hypertension (high blood pressure).
Can the use of Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some people.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it would be best to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
The use of Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for people with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should preferably be avoided in people with severe kidney or liver impairment and in people with anuria (reduction or absence of urine).
Its use should also be avoided in women who are in the second and third trimesters of their pregnancy.
What is the recommended storage condition for Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Dispose the unused or expired medicine.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I come off Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is controlled?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Angiosart CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
=

What is Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
It is used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension).
It relaxes and widens the blood vessels, making it easier for the blood to pass through the vessels.
As a result of this, the heart does not have to work more to push the blood.
Since the workload on the heart is reduced, it helps to lower the blood pressure and thus reduces the risk of heart attack and stroke.
What should I tell my doctor before taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet?
Before taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet you must tell your doctor if you are allergic to Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet or any of its ingredients.
You must tell the doctor if you have any problems related to heart, liver, kidneys (if you are on dialysis) or blood, such as a low white blood cell count (neutropenia or agranulocytosis).
Inform your doctor if you have diabetes, irregular blood pressure or if you have recently had diarrhea or vomiting.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Consult your doctor before taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet if you are planning to conceive, if you are pregnant or breastfeeding to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
What time of the day should I take Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet?
Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet should be taken at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
Take it in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor.
Your doctor may advise you to take your first dose before bedtime, because it can make you dizzy.
After the first dose, if you do not feel dizzy, you may take Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet at any time of the day.
Your dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and therefore, it will vary from person to person.
If you experience any side effects while taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet, please consult your doctor.
I feel better after taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet, can I stop taking it?
No, continue taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet even if you feel better and your blood pressure is under control.
Stopping Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet suddenly may cause your blood pressure to increase and your chances of stroke or heart attack may rise.
Usually once you start taking any medicine for controlling blood pressure, you have to continue taking it life long unless you cannot tolerate it.
Will Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet make me feel dizzy? What should I do about it?
Yes, Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet may make you feel dizzy or lightheaded.
If Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet makes you feel dizzy when you stand up, try getting up very slowly or stay seated until you feel better.
If you begin to feel dizzy, lie down so that you don't faint, then sit until you feel better.
Don’t drive, do not use tools or machines and avoid anything requiring concentration while you're feeling dizzy or shaky.
What other lifestyle changes should I make while taking Angiotensin 2.5mg Tablet?
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Angipres 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Does ANGITAB 20MG TABLET affect heart rate?
Yes, ANGITAB 20MG TABLET may affect the heart rate.
ANGITAB 20MG TABLET causes a decrease in blood pressure.
This decrease in blood pressure further causes a decrease in the heart rate (bradycardia).
In some cases, it may also cause an increase in the heart rate (tachycardia).
Consult your doctor in case you do not feel well after taking this medicine or if you notice a change in your heart rate.
What if I forget to take a dose of ANGITAB 20MG TABLET?
You can take the forgotten dose of ANGITAB 20MG TABLET if you remember it within 12 hours.
However, if you remember it after 12 hours of the scheduled time, then skip the missed dose and continue with the next dose.
Can I stop taking ANGITAB 20MG TABLET after sometime?
No, do not stop taking this medicine without talking to your doctor.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your chances of having an anginal attack.
If you have any concerns regarding ANGITAB 20MG TABLET consult your doctor.
What are the symptoms of an overdose of ANGITAB 20MG TABLET?
Taking more than the recommended dose of ANGITAB 20MG TABLET may cause throbbing headache, reddening of the skin, chills along with sweating, nausea, vomiting, and a fast heartbeat.
Seek emergency help and consult your doctor immediately if you take more than the recommended dose of this medicine.
Can ANGITAB 20MG TABLET be taken at night?
Depending upon the dose, your doctor may recommend you to take this medicine once or twice daily.
When a single dose is recommended, then it is preferred to be taken in the morning.
If taking it twice a day, maintain a gap of 7 hours between the two doses.
This helps decrease the chances of ANGITAB 20MG TABLET becoming ineffective (tolerance) after some time.
Does ANGITAB 20MG TABLET lower BP?
Yes, ANGITAB 20MG TABLET can cause a fall in blood pressure.
This medicine widens the blood vessels and decreases the resistance in them, causing a fall in blood pressure.
This fall in blood pressure may in turn decrease the heartbeat which can lead to angina.
This medicine should be avoided in people who already have low blood pressure.
Discuss with your doctor if you have any concerns.
Can I take sildenafil while taking ANGITAB 20MG TABLET?
No, you should not take sildenafil along with ANGITAB 20MG TABLET.
Both these medicines lower blood pressure and belong to the same class.
Taking these two medicines together may cause a severe decrease in blood pressure, fainting, and even a heart attack.
Along with this, also avoid taking other medicines belonging to similar classes such as vardenafil and tadalafil.
=

Does Angitrit 20mg Tablet affect heart rate?
Yes, Angitrit 20mg Tablet may affect the heart rate.
Angitrit 20mg Tablet causes a decrease in blood pressure.
This decrease in blood pressure further causes a decrease in the heart rate (bradycardia).
In some cases, it may also cause an increase in the heart rate (tachycardia).
Consult your doctor in case you do not feel well after taking this medicine or if you notice a change in your heart rate.
What if I forget to take a dose of Angitrit 20mg Tablet?
You can take the forgotten dose of Angitrit 20mg Tablet if you remember it within 12 hours.
However, if you remember it after 12 hours of the scheduled time, then skip the missed dose and continue with the next dose.
Can I stop taking Angitrit 20mg Tablet after sometime?
No, do not stop taking this medicine without talking to your doctor.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your chances of having an anginal attack.
If you have any concerns regarding Angitrit 20mg Tablet consult your doctor.
What are the symptoms of an overdose of Angitrit 20mg Tablet?
Taking more than the recommended dose of Angitrit 20mg Tablet may cause throbbing headache, reddening of the skin, chills along with sweating, nausea, vomiting, and a fast heartbeat.
Seek emergency help and consult your doctor immediately if you take more than the recommended dose of this medicine.
Can Angitrit 20mg Tablet be taken at night?
Depending upon the dose, your doctor may recommend you to take this medicine once or twice daily.
When a single dose is recommended, then it is preferred to be taken in the morning.
If taking it twice a day, maintain a gap of 7 hours between the two doses.
This helps decrease the chances of Angitrit 20mg Tablet becoming ineffective (tolerance) after some time.
Does Angitrit 20mg Tablet lower BP?
Yes, Angitrit 20mg Tablet can cause a fall in blood pressure.
This medicine widens the blood vessels and decreases the resistance in them, causing a fall in blood pressure.
This fall in blood pressure may in turn decrease the heartbeat which can lead to angina.
This medicine should be avoided in people who already have low blood pressure.
Discuss with your doctor if you have any concerns.
Can I take sildenafil while taking Angitrit 20mg Tablet?
No, you should not take sildenafil along with Angitrit 20mg Tablet.
Both these medicines lower blood pressure and belong to the same class.
Taking these two medicines together may cause a severe decrease in blood pressure, fainting, and even a heart attack.
Along with this, also avoid taking other medicines belonging to similar classes such as vardenafil and tadalafil.
=

Is Angizem 180mg Tablet a blood thinner?
No, Angizem 180mg Tablet is not a blood thinner.
It belongs to the calcium channel blocker class of medicines.
It is used to treat hypertension, arrhythmias and angina (chest pain caused by a reduction of oxygen to the heart muscle).
Does Angizem 180mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Angizem 180mg Tablet may cause weight gain but not in everybody.
However, if you are gaining weight while taking Angizem 180mg Tablet then consult your doctor or a nutritionist.
Is it better to take Angizem 180mg Tablet in the morning or at night?
It is recommended to take Angizem 180mg Tablet at night and before meals.
The dose will be decided by your doctor and should be taken exactly as prescribed by the doctor.
Does Angizem 180mg Tablet affect sleep?
Angizem 180mg Tablet may cause sleeplessness which does not affect everyone.
If this persists and worries you talk to your doctor.
Who should not take Angizem 180mg Tablet?
You should not take Angizem 180mg Tablet if you are allergic to it, have an irregular or slow heartbeat, heart failure, and low blood pressure.
It should not be given to children and women who are pregnant or planning to get pregnant.
What are the symptoms of overdose of Angizem 180mg Tablet?
Symptoms of overdose of Angizem 180mg Tablet include slow, fast, or irregular heartbeat, fainting, difficulty breathing and seizures.
It may also cause dizziness, confusion, nausea, vomiting and increased sweating.
Contact your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical services in a nearby hospital.
=

Can I take sildenafil if I am taking Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR?
No, you should not take sildenafil if you are taking Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR.
Taking these two medicines together can cause an excessive fall in blood pressure, which may even be life-threatening.
What effect does Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR have on blood pressure?
Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR decreases the blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels, but is not recommended for the treatment of high blood pressure.
The drop in blood pressure may cause lightheadedness, especially when changing your position suddenly.
Does the effect of Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR wear off after some time?
Yes, excessive use of Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR may cause tolerance which means that Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR may lose its effectiveness on you.
Therefore, usually the doctors prescribe the smallest dose required for effective relief of acute angina attack.
This helps maintain the effectiveness of Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR.
What does too much Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR do?
Excess Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR may result in low blood pressure, sweating, nausea, vomiting, headache, weak and fast pulse.
It may also cause weakness, lightheadedness on standing and the patient might even faint.
The patient will require emergency medical treatment in such a case.
Can I stop using Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR as I feel better now?
Stopping Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR suddenly may bring on attacks of angina, especially if you have been using it for several weeks or more.
Talk to your doctor who will advise you to reduce the dose gradually over 4 to 6 weeks before you stop using it completely.
Does Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR stop heart attacks?
Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR is prescribed to prevent attacks of heart-related chest pain (angina) in patients with coronary artery disease.
In this disease the blood vessels (coronary arteries) which supply blood to the heart become narrowed because of which the heart has to work harder to get enough oxygen.
Anglit 2.6 Tablet CR prevents angina by relaxing the blood vessels so that the heart does not have to work very hard.
Also, relaxation of coronary arteries increases the oxygen supply to the heart.
=

What is Angloflu 150mg Tablet used for?
Angloflu 150mg Tablet is an antifungal medicine.
It is used for the treatment of many fungal infections like Cryptococcal meningitis (fungal infection in the brain) and Coccidioidomycosis (a disease of the lungs).
Additionally, it is helpful in the treatment of infections caused by Candida found in the bloodstream, body organs (e.g., heart, lungs) or urinary tract, mucosal thrush (infection affecting the lining of the mouth, throat, and denture sore mouth), and genital thrush (infection of the vagina or penis).
It can also be used to treat skin infections like athlete's foot, ringworm, jock itch, nail infection.
Can Angloflu 150mg Tablet be taken with oral contraceptives (OCPs) or birth control pills?
Angloflu 150mg Tablet has been reported to have a minor interaction when taken with estradiol (a component of oral contraceptives).
It can increase the level or effect of estradiol when given along with it.
Before starting the treatment with Angloflu 150mg Tablet inform your doctor if you are taking birth control pills.
Can Angloflu 150mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Angloflu 150mg Tablet may cause hair loss as a rare side effect.
If during the treatment you experience hair loss, inform your doctor.
Yes, Angloflu 150mg Tablet is effective when used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Angloflu 150mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Is Angloflu 150mg Tablet fungistatic or fungicidal?
Angloflu 150mg Tablet is primarily fungistatic which means it controls the growth of fungus).
However, it may also act as a fungicidal (kills fungus) medicine against certain organisms, specifically Cryptococcus in a dose-dependent manner, specifically Cryptococcus.
Does Angloflu 150mg Tablet treat urinary tract infection (UTI)?
Angloflu 150mg Tablet is used to treat urinary tract infections (UTI) caused mainly by Candida.
However, bacteria growth can also cause UTI in some cases.
If you are suffering from UTI, please consult your doctor as the cause of infection (fungal or bacterial, or other) needs to be identified before the start of any treatment.
Can I take Angloflu 150mg Tablet with alcohol?
Yes, Angloflu 150mg Tablet can be taken with alcohol.
No interactions have been reported between the two.
However, it is better to consult your doctor on the use of alcohol before taking Angloflu 150mg Tablet to avoid any side effects and get the maximum benefit of Angloflu 150mg Tablet.
=

Is there any harm if I drive after taking the medicine?
Yes, you should try to avoid driving after taking the medicine since Anglospas 10mg/250mg Injection may cause sleepiness, drowsiness or visual disturbances.
How long should I take Anglospas 10mg/250mg Injection?
=

How long does Anglozone T 1000mg/125mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Anglozone T 1000mg/125mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Anglozone T 1000mg/125mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Anic 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

What if I don't get better after using Anich 100mg/200mg Tablet VT?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Anich 100mg/200mg Tablet VT when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anich 100mg/200mg Tablet VT and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anich 100mg/200mg Tablet VT?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet?
Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Methylcobalamin.
This medication is useful in the treatment of pain due to nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
This medication works by regenerating damaged nerves in the body and decreasing the pain sensation.
The nerves in the periphery of your body, such as the nerves in your toes and fingertip are called peripheral nerves and any damage to one or more of these nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.
These nerves carry messages to/from the brain and spinal cord from/to the rest of the body.
A damage caused to these nerves stops them from functioning properly and the messages traveling between your central and peripheral nervous system get disrupted.
Can I stop taking Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, take Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet for the full prescribed length of time.
Your symptoms may improve before the nerves are completely regenerated and healed.
Can the use of Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet as it can lead to severe sleepiness , causing falls or accidents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Anicobal G 300mg/500mcg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Levosalbutamol works by widening the air passages in your lungs so that air can flow into your lungs more freely.
For people with asthma, Levosalbutamol helps to relieve symptoms such as coughing, wheezing and shortness of breath, particularly at night.
Levosalbutamol should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Levosalbutamol can be taken with or without food, preferably at the same time each day to reduce the chances of a missed dose.
However, it is advisable to take Levosalbutamol just before bedtime with a glass of water.
What if I forget to take a dose of Levosalbutamol?
If you forget a dose of Levosalbutamol, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
What would happen if I take higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol?
Taking a higher than the recommended dose of Levosalbutamol may cause seizures, chest pain, nervousness, headache, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness and lack of energy.
High doses of Levosalbutamol may also cause fast, irregular or pounding heartbeat, uncontrollable shaking of any part of the body and difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
In any such case, seek immediate medical attention.
Both Levosalbutamol and Albuterol belong to the same class of medicines.
and are used for quick relief in symptoms of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) such as wheezing, shortness of breath and coughing.
Levosalbutamol contains the active form of Albuterol known as R-albuterol.
On the other hand, Albuterol contains a mixture of equal amounts of R-albuterol (active form) and S-albuterol (inactive form of Albuterol).
Levosalbutamol, being the active form may have lesser side effects when compared to the inactive form.
Is it safe to take Levosalbutamol if I have heart disease?
Yes, it is considered safe, but its use depends on the severity of your heart problem.
If you experience chest pain or any other symptom of worsening heart disease while taking Levosalbutamol, seek immediate medical advice.
Being a diabetic, what should I remember while taking Levosalbutamol?
Levosalbutamol may cause blood sugar levels to rise.
Therefore, your doctor may adjust your dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines.
Keep a regular check on your blood glucose levels and do not miss any dose.
Consult your doctor if you experience a sudden rise in blood sugar levels.
I have started using Levosalbutamol and I am experiencing headaches and shakiness.
Is this because of Levosalbutamol and will these go away?
Yes, it could be due to Levosalbutamol.
Feeling shaky is a common side effect of Levosalbutamol which usually goes away after some time.
For headaches, drink plenty of water, get sufficient rest and avoid alcohol.
Usually, headaches go away after a week.
If they persist for a long time, contact your doctor.
=

Anidox Syrup is a new generation long-acting oral bronchodilator.
Anidox Syrup inhibits an enzyme called phosphodiesterase which results in bronchodilation (dilation or widening of the airways in the lungs by relaxing the surrounding smooth muscle).
It is used for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
COPD is a lung disease characterized by chronic obstruction of lung airflow that interferes with normal breathing and is not fully reversible.
Anidox Syrup relieves the breathlessness and cough thereby providing symptomatic relief.
Anidox Syrup is not an antibiotic.
Anidox Syrup is a bronchodilator used for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Anidox Syrup is not a steroid.
Anidox Syrup is a bronchodilator used for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
What is Anidox Syrup used for?
Anidox Syrup is a bronchodilator used for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
It helps to relieve breathlessness and cough thereby providing symptomatic relief.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Anihist P Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Anihist P Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Anihist P Syrup?
Anihist P Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Anihist P Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Anihist P Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anihist P Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Nimesulide and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving the pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Can I stop taking Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet is usually used for short-term pain relief and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should also be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with the history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex helps to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Does Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet help in relieving stomach pain?
No, Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet contains Nimesulide and Paracetamol and both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
Is it safe to take a higher than the recommended dose of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
No, you should avoid taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Anilide P 100mg/500mg Tablet?
=

Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Nimesulide and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving the pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Can I stop taking Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet is usually used for short-term pain relief and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet?
The use of Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should also be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with the history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet with Vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet can be taken with Vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, Vitamin B-complex helps to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Does Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet help in relieving stomach pain?
No, Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet cause damage to the liver?
Anipar 100mg/500mg Tablet contains Nimesulide and Paracetamol and both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
=

Aniq 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Aniq 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Aniq 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aniq 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Aniq 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Aniq 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Aniq 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Aniq 500mg Tablet to work?
Aniq 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Aniq 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Aniq 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Aniq 500mg Tablet?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Aniq 500mg Tablet should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Aniq 500mg Tablet.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Aniq 500mg Tablet increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Aniq 500mg Tablet a strong antibiotic?
Aniq 500mg Tablet is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Aniq 500mg Tablet has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
Can you get a yeast infection from taking Aniq 500mg Tablet?
Some people may get a fungal or yeast infection known as thrush after taking Aniq 500mg Tablet.
Antibiotics such as Aniq 500mg Tablet can kill the normal or ‘good bacteria’ of your intestine responsible for preventing thrush.
You should inform your doctor if you get a sore or vaginal itching or discharge.
Also, inform your doctor if you get a white patch in the mouth or tongue after taking Aniq 500mg Tablet or soon after stopping it.
=

If I do not see an improvement in my symptoms, can I stop taking Anitam Syrup?
No, do not stop taking Anitam Syrup on your own.
Stopping it suddenly may have unwanted effects like twitching and jerking movements.
If Anitam Syrup does not improve your symptoms, consult your doctor.
The doctor may suggest a slow reduction of Anitam Syrup dose.
Who should avoid taking Anitam Syrup?
You should not take Anitam Syrup if you are allergic to Anitam Syrup or any of the ingredients in the medicine.
Also, avoid taking Anitam Syrup if your kidney functions are severely deranged or if you ever had localized bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage).
You should also avoid taking this medicine if you are suffering from Huntington’s disease/chorea (a genetic disorder where the brain cells die quickly causing deterioration of mental and physical abilities over time).
What is the correct way of taking Anitam Syrup?
Anitam Syrup can be taken with or without food.
Swallow the tablets as a whole with a glass of water.
Do not break or chew the tablets.
If you find it difficult to swallow, tell your doctor as soon as possible.
=

What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Anitryp 25mg Tablet?
Antidepressants, including Anitryp 25mg Tablet, are just one of several approaches to treat depression.
Certain lifestyle changes can help you get maximum benefit of Anitryp 25mg Tablet and help you recover fast.
Keeping active and eating a healthy diet can make a significant difference to how quickly you recover from depression.
Think positively and try to discuss your thoughts with others to reduce stress.
Practice yoga or take up a hobby.
Ensure that you have a sound sleep to calm your mind.
Stay away from smoking or alcohol consumption as these will only worsen your depression.
Take your medicines as prescribed even if you start feeling better.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with Anitryp 25mg Tablet?
Anitryp 25mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
So, avoid driving or using machinery until you know how the medicine affects you.
Also, it is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might increase sleepiness.
Can the use of Anitryp 25mg Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Anitryp 25mg Tablet can affect sex life in both men and women.
It may cause decreased sexual desire or you may experience discomfort during intercourse.
Men may experience inability to develop or maintain an erection during sexual activity and may be unable to have an orgasm.
If you notice these symptoms, do not stop taking the medicine but consult your doctor.
I have been taking Anitryp 25mg Tablet for depression since a week and recently I have been wanting to harm myself.
What should I do? Is it because of the medicine?
You should immediately consult your doctor or go to the hospital.
Your suicidal tendencies may have increased because of your disease or the medicine.
Generally, Anitryp 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect but may take longer.
Therefore, when you start taking Anitryp 25mg Tablet, you may have thoughts about killing or harming yourself.
This is more common in people who previously had suicidal tendencies or are young adults (less than 25 years old).
However, the effect of medicine is different for every individual.
Can Anitryp 25mg Tablet cause urinary problems?
Yes, Anitryp 25mg Tablet can cause urinary problems.
It is more commonly seen in elderly patients who are more than 65 years old.
The patient may face difficulty in passing urine which can further lead to a urinary tract infection.
Consult your doctor immediately if you develop these symptoms.
If my pain is not relieved, can I take more than the recommended dose?
No, you should use Anitryp 25mg Tablet strictly as prescribed by the doctor.
If the dose exceeds, you may develop drowsiness, confusion, difficulty in speech, dry mouth, tiredness, difficulty in walking, fever, difficulty in breathing, blue discoloration of the skin and decreased heartbeat.
Your pain may not be relieved because Anitryp 25mg Tablet takes about 2 weeks to show its effect, but it may take longer in some cases.
The duration of treatment can differ from individual to individual.
Consult your doctor if your symptoms are not relieved.
=

Ankaxin 750mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Ankaxin 750mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Ankaxin 750mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Ankaxin 750mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Ankaxin 750mg Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, the use of Ankaxin 750mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle.
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Ankaxin 750mg Tablet but it may be more significant in people above 60 years of age.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
=

Anleo-D Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Anleo-D Tablet?
Anleo-D Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anleo-D Tablet?
The use of Anleo-D Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Anleo-D Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anleo-D Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Anleo-D Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anleo-D Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anleo-D Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of four medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, Trypsin and Chymotrypsin.
This medicine helps in decreasing pain and swelling.
It lowers the levels of chemical substances in the body that causes pain and swelling.
Can I get addicted to Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet?
No, there is no report of any patient getting addicted to Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage due to long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can the use of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
This medicine is known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
How long will Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet take to act?
It may take about an hour to see the initial benefit of pain relief after taking Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet.
What if I forget to take Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet?
If you forget to take the scheduled dose of Anlof TC 100mg/325mg Tablet and it is almost time for your next dose, skip the dose you missed and take your next dose at the scheduled time.
Otherwise, take it as soon as you remember, and then go back to taking your medicine as you would normally.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the dose you missed because this may increase the risk of unwanted side effect.
If you are not sure what to do, consult your doctor about how to manage a situation like this.
=

For how long can Anmik 100mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Anmik 100mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Anmik 100mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Anmik 100mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Anmik 100mg Injection administered?
Anmik 100mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Anmik 100mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Anmik 100mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Anmik 100mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anmik 100mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
=

If I do not see an improvement in my symptoms, can I stop taking Anneal P 500mg Syrup?
No, do not stop taking Anneal P 500mg Syrup on your own.
Stopping it suddenly may have unwanted effects like twitching and jerking movements.
If Anneal P 500mg Syrup does not improve your symptoms, consult your doctor.
The doctor may suggest a slow reduction of Anneal P 500mg Syrup dose.
Who should avoid taking Anneal P 500mg Syrup?
You should not take Anneal P 500mg Syrup if you are allergic to Anneal P 500mg Syrup or any of the ingredients in the medicine.
Also, avoid taking Anneal P 500mg Syrup if your kidney functions are severely deranged or if you ever had localized bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage).
You should also avoid taking this medicine if you are suffering from Huntington’s disease/chorea (a genetic disorder where the brain cells die quickly causing deterioration of mental and physical abilities over time).
What is the correct way of taking Anneal P 500mg Syrup?
Anneal P 500mg Syrup can be taken with or without food.
Swallow the tablets as a whole with a glass of water.
Do not break or chew the tablets.
If you find it difficult to swallow, tell your doctor as soon as possible.
=

Is Annoxe 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Annoxe 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Annoxe 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Annoxe 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Annoxe 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Annoxe 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Annoxe 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Annoxe 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Annoxe 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Annoxe 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Annoxe 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Annoxe 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Annoxe 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Annoxe 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Annoxe 200mg Tablet treat UTI?
=

Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Norfloxacin and Tinidazole.
This medication is used to treat diarrhea and dysentry caused due to infection.
They work by killing the harmful microorganisms that cause infection.
Together they help to treat infection more effectively.
Can I stop taking Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet increase the risk of tendon rupture?
Yes, Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of tendon rupture commonly in the achilles tendon.
Tendon problems can happen in people of all ages who take Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet.
Inform your health care provider if you hear or feel a snap or pop, have severe pain, rapid or immediate bruising after an accident, and are unable to use the affected arm or leg.
This may indicate that you have a tendon rupture.
Can the use of Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet cause metallic taste?
Yes, Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet can cause a temporary metallic taste.
This metallic taste can be reduced by chewing sugar-free gum or mints, brushing teeth after the meals and by staying hydrated.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet?
The use of Anobact 400mg/600mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to norfloxacin or tinidazole or any other excipient present in the medicine.
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of tendinitis (inflammation of the tendons) or tendon rupture caused because of the use of ciprofloxacin or any other medicine which belongs to the quinolone group of antimicrobial agents.
It is also avoided in patients with some neurological disorders.
=

How do you use Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup?
Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup should be used in the dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Shake the bottle well before each use.
Mix it in a glass of water or juice as advised by your doctor.
Avoid taking Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup on an empty stomach if diarrhea occurs.
Drink plenty of fluids while taking this medicine to avoid stomach upset.
How long does it take to work?
Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup taken few minutes to start working and its effect lasts for around four to six hours.
Do not skip doses and use it for the duration prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Taking Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup in more quantity as recommended by your doctor, will not help you recover faster.
However, it may only expose you to increased side effects only.
Therefore, it is advised that you take it as per the directions given by your doctor and do not double the dose, even if you forget to take your usual dose.
What is the function of Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup?
Anocitrate 1250mg Syrup is a urine alkaliser that decreases the production of uric acid.
=

How long can I take Anofer S 100mg Injection for?
Anofer S 100mg Injection is used to regulate hemoglobin levels in the human body.
It is usually given to patients who have iron deficient anemia or iron deficiency.
The doctor may suggest using this medicine till the hemoglobin level becomes normal.
Do consult your doctor to understand the usage of this medicine properly.
Can I take Anofer S 100mg Injection for anemia and iron deficiency?
Yes, Anofer S 100mg Injection can be taken for iron deficiency anemia and iron deficiency.
However, its use for other types of anemia is not recommended.
Take Anofer S 100mg Injection in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
What types of food items should I take other than Anofer S 100mg Injection?
You can consume food items that are rich in iron content (like red meat, pork, poultry and seafood).
Other food items which contain rich iron content include beans, dark green leafy vegetables (like spinach), peas, dried fruit (raisins and apricots), iron-fortified cereals, breads and pastas.
You can also try iron supplements (tablets or capsules) available at pharmacy stores for iron deficient anemia.
Can I take iron with vitamin C/ Vitamin D/ multivitamin/ folic acid?
Yes, iron and vitamin C/ Vitamin D/ multivitamin/ folic acid can be taken together.
Taking vitamin C and iron together helps the body absorb the iron.
However, it would be best to consult your doctor before using Anofer S 100mg Injection with other medicines.
Can I take Anofer S 100mg Injection with zinc?
No, Anofer S 100mg Injection may alter the absorption of zinc, if given together.
Therefore, it is advisable not to take Anofer S 100mg Injection with zinc.
Can I take Anofer S 100mg Injection with Tylenol?
Yes, you can take Tylenol (paracetamol) with iron.
However, it is advised to always consult your doctor before taking any medicine to avoid any complexity.
Does Anofer S 100mg Injection increase weight?
Yes, Anofer S 100mg Injection can increase weight.
Exercise regularly and take a balanced diet that includes whole grains, fresh fruits, vegetables and fat-free products.
You should consult your doctor if you need any further help to manage your weight.
Does Anofer S 100mg Injection cause constipation or acne?
Yes, Anofer S 100mg Injection may cause constipation or acne.
Constipation and acne are among some of the most common side effects of Anofer S 100mg Injection.
Please consult your doctor if any of these side effects bother you.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR?
The use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Anoglim M 2mg/500mg Tablet SR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

Does Anorelief Cream cure anal fissures?
No, it does not cure fissures but Anorelief Cream reduces inflammation of mucous membrane and skin.
It reduces irritation, alleviates pain and itching, thus providing symptomatic relief.
Why is my fissure not healing?
Fissures usually heal within a few weeks.
But if they are not, this is because the oxygen supply, carried by the blood, to these fissures is poor which further slows down the healing process.
As a result, these fissures fail to heal and continue to get worse.
You should consult a doctor immediately if you have been facing issues for a duration longer than a few weeks.
What should I eat and avoid in fissure?
You must take a fiber-rich diet such as vegetables, fresh fruits and whole grains if you have fissures.
Drink plenty of water and avoid taking alcohol.
This will ensure that your stools are soft and easy to pass.
You may also take laxatives or fiber supplements if you are facing issues with digestion.
Your doctor will suggest ways to avoid constipation and thereby promote healing of fissures.
Spicy foods do not cause fissures.
But, they can irritate the fissures and worsen your symptoms.
Therefore, it is advised that you avoid taking spicy foods if you are facing issues with your fissures.
How do you use Anorelief Cream cream?
Follow your doctor’s instructions before using Anorelief Cream.
Apply a small amount of the ointment to the affected rectal area as directed.
If this is to be used inside the rectum, attach the rectal applicator onto the tube.
Insert the applicator gently and to full extent into the rectum.
Gently squeeze the tube to deliver the medication while withdrawing it.
How long does it take to heal fissures?
Fissures usually heal within a few weeks.
But, if they persist for longer than 4 to 6 weeks, they are termed as chronic fissures.
Please consult your doctor without any delay if you have been noticing fissures for longer than 4 weeks.
=

Is Anpod 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Anpod 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Anpod 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anpod 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Anpod 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Anpod 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Anpod 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Anpod 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Anpod 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Anpod 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anpod 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Anpod 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Anpod 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Anpod 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Anpod 200mg Tablet treat UTI?
Yes, Anpod 200mg Tablet may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Anpod 200mg Tablet.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

Anprox Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Anprox Tablet?
Anprox Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Anprox Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Anprox Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Anprox Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anprox Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Anprox Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anprox Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anprox Tablet?
The use of Anprox Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Anprox Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Anprox Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Anprox Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Anprox Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Anprox Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Anprox Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Anprox Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Ansac TP 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Can the use of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet can make you feel drowsy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how this medicine affects you.
Can Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet cause indigestion?
Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet may cause indigestion.
However, taking it with or after food can prevent indigestion.
Talk to your doctor if indigestion persists.
Are there any contraindications associated with the use of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet?
Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with hypersensitivity to the active substances, diphenhydramine or other antihistamines of similar structure or to any of the excipients.
Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet should be avoided in patients with glaucoma, fits, increased intracranial pressure, alcohol abuse, urinating issues, liver or kidney disease.
It is also not recommended during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
What if I accidentally take too much of this medicine?
Visit the nearest emergency department if you accidentally take too much of this medicine.
Symptoms of an overdose may include tiredness, pupil dilation, unable to urinate, dry mouth, flushing, fast heart rate, sweating, headache, dizziness and shakiness.
What if I miss a dose of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet?
If you miss a dose of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet, you should skip the missed dose and take the next dose at its usual time and quantity.
You should not take a double dose of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet to make up for a missed dose.
Can I stop taking Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet if I feel well?
You should not stop taking Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet until your doctor asks you to.
If you stop taking Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet earlier than advised, the symptoms of vertigo may reappear (dizziness and spinning).
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anset CD 20mg/40mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Anshicet M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

Can Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet be taken with food?
It is advisable to take Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet with food or immediately after food since this medicine may cause stomach upset.
Can Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet stop menstruation?
No, Mefspas does not have any effect on menstrual bleeding, neither does it affect the amount nor the duration of bleeding.
It does not affect the menstrual cycle and helps relieve the pain caused due to menstrual cramps.
How long should I take Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet?
Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet is not prescribed to be taken on a regular basis.
Therefore, it is advised to take Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet for the shortest possible time advised by the doctor or only when you experience menstrual pain.
Is there any harm if I drive after taking the medicine?
Yes, you should try to avoid driving after taking Anspas 10mg/250mg Tablet as this medicine may cause dizziness or sleepiness.
These side effects get worse with the consumption of alcohol.
=

How long can I take Ansurose 20mg Injection for?
Ansurose 20mg Injection is used to regulate hemoglobin levels in the human body.
It is usually given to patients who have iron deficient anemia or iron deficiency.
The doctor may suggest using this medicine till the hemoglobin level becomes normal.
Do consult your doctor to understand the usage of this medicine properly.
Can I take Ansurose 20mg Injection for anemia and iron deficiency?
Yes, Ansurose 20mg Injection can be taken for iron deficiency anemia and iron deficiency.
However, its use for other types of anemia is not recommended.
Take Ansurose 20mg Injection in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
What types of food items should I take other than Ansurose 20mg Injection?
You can consume food items that are rich in iron content (like red meat, pork, poultry and seafood).
Other food items which contain rich iron content include beans, dark green leafy vegetables (like spinach), peas, dried fruit (raisins and apricots), iron-fortified cereals, breads and pastas.
You can also try iron supplements (tablets or capsules) available at pharmacy stores for iron deficient anemia.
Can I take iron with vitamin C/ Vitamin D/ multivitamin/ folic acid?
Yes, iron and vitamin C/ Vitamin D/ multivitamin/ folic acid can be taken together.
Taking vitamin C and iron together helps the body absorb the iron.
However, it would be best to consult your doctor before using Ansurose 20mg Injection with other medicines.
Can I take Ansurose 20mg Injection with zinc?
No, Ansurose 20mg Injection may alter the absorption of zinc, if given together.
Therefore, it is advisable not to take Ansurose 20mg Injection with zinc.
Can I take Ansurose 20mg Injection with Tylenol?
Yes, you can take Tylenol (paracetamol) with iron.
However, it is advised to always consult your doctor before taking any medicine to avoid any complexity.
Does Ansurose 20mg Injection increase weight?
Yes, Ansurose 20mg Injection can increase weight.
Exercise regularly and take a balanced diet that includes whole grains, fresh fruits, vegetables and fat-free products.
You should consult your doctor if you need any further help to manage your weight.
Does Ansurose 20mg Injection cause constipation or acne?
Yes, Ansurose 20mg Injection may cause constipation or acne.
Constipation and acne are among some of the most common side effects of Ansurose 20mg Injection.
Please consult your doctor if any of these side effects bother you.
=

Yes, Antadict 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration in a hospital or specialized clinic as advised by your special doctor
Is Antadict 250mg Tablet over-the-counter medicine?
No, Antadict 250mg Tablet is not an over-the-counter medicine.
Antadict 250mg Tablet treatment for alcohol withdrawal should be initiated only in a hospital or specialized clinic and by experienced doctors only.
Patients should follow advice of the doctor regarding its use
No, Antadict 250mg Tablet is not addictive.
It is used to treat alcohol addiction and chronic alcoholism
Antadict 250mg Tablet is an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor.
It works by blocking the processing of alcohol in the body causing unpleasant feeling leading to alcohol withdrawal
Does Antadict 250mg Tablet work for everyone?
Antadict 250mg Tablet works for chronic alcoholics who are cooperative and willing to give up alcoholism.
Patients should follow advice of the doctor regarding its use
=

Is it safe to use Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
Yes, Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
What are the contraindications of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
The use of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule is considered to be harmful in patients with a known hypersensitivity to omeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients present in the medicine.
Cautious use is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
What is the best time to take Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
It is best to take the medicine daily before breakfast or on an empty stomach.
Can the use of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule cause abnormal heartbeat?
Yes, the use of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule can cause an increased risk of irregular heartbeat (serious arrhythmias).
These are serious side effects but the chances that it may happen is very low.
The risk may be slightly higher in those who are more than 60 years of age.
Does the use of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule lead to dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone, which is present in this combination.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use increases the risk of tooth decay.
What is the recommended storage condition for Antamed D 10mg/20mg Capsule?
=

Why is Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free prescribed?
Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free is prescribed for the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
How should I take Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free?
Take Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
Can I drink water after taking Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free?
Avoid drinking anything immediately after taking Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free as that can reduce the effectiveness of this medicine.
Can the use of Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free cause constipation?
Yes, Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free contains Sucralfate, which can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation if it persists for a long time.
Can I stop taking Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free when my symptoms are relieved?
No, take Antawaq-O Oral Suspension Sugar Free for the full prescribed length of time even if you feel better.
Do not stop taking this medication without consulting your doctor.
=

How should Antekavir 0.5 Tablet be taken?
You should take Antekavir 0.5 Tablet exactly as prescribed by your doctor and continue taking it till your doctor tells you to stop.
It is usually taken once a day on an empty stomach, at least 2 hours after a meal and at least 2 hours before the next meal.
It is advised to take it around the same time every day.
If not sure, consult your doctor.
Can Antekavir 0.5 Tablet cause liver problems?
Yes, Antekavir 0.5 Tablet can cause serious liver problems like hepatomegaly (enlargement of the liver) and steatosis (an increased build-up of fat in the liver).
It is important to know that hepatomegaly along with steatosis is a serious medical emergency which requires immediate medical attention.
What are the symptoms of serious liver problems?
The symptoms of liver problems include jaundice (a condition in which your skin or the white part of your eyes turns yellow), dark-colored urine, light-colored stools, loss of appetite, nausea and stomach pain.
These symptoms are more common in women, overweight patients, or if you have been on Antekavir 0.5 Tablet for a long time.
Immediately contact your doctor if you experience any such symptoms.
What is drug resistance? Can I develop drug resistance with Antekavir 0.5 Tablet?
Drug resistance is a state where the medicine which was once effective in treating an infection becomes ineffective.
This mainly happens due to the ability acquired by the virus or bacteria to get modified inside the body which affects the overall working of the medicine.
Hence, the medicine is no longer able to fight against the virus or bacteria.
Generally, drug resistance with Antekavir 0.5 Tablet is more likely to happen if you take less dose than what is recommended.
How long should I take Antekavir 0.5 Tablet?
Do not stop taking entecavir without consulting your doctor.
Stopping entecavir before treatment may worsen your hepatitis.
This can happen during the first several months after you stop taking entecavir.
Take the medicine strictly as advised and do not miss any dose.
What if HIV infection co-exists with HBV infection? Will this affect treatment with Antekavir 0.5 Tablet?
The use of Antekavir 0.5 Tablet is not recommended in HBV patients who are also diagnosed with HIV, until and unless these patients start taking medicines for HIV management.
Starting Antekavir 0.5 Tablet in such patients may cause resistance to the prescribed HIV medicines.
Therefore, doctors recommend tests for HIV in patients diagnosed with HBV infection before starting treatment with Antekavir 0.5 Tablet.
=

What is Antgaba NT 100 Tablet?
Antgaba NT 100 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Nortriptyline.
This medicine is useful in the treatment of nerve pain (Neuropathic pain).
It calms the damaged or overactive nerves by acting on the brain.
Thereby, it decreases the pain sensation.
Can I stop taking Antgaba NT 100 Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, you should not stop taking $nmae even if your pain is relieved.
Continue to take it as advised by your doctor.
If you suddenly stop taking Antgaba NT 100 Tablet, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as anxiety, sleeping difficulties, nausea, pain and sweating.
You may need to gradually taper the dose before you stop the medication completely.
How to manage weight gain associated with the use of Antgaba NT 100 Tablet?
Antgaba NT 100 Tablet can make you feel hungry which might make you eat more, thereby increasing your chances of putting on weight.
However, preventing weight gain is easier than losing the increased weight.
Try to eat a healthy balanced diet without increasing your portion sizes (per-meal intake).
Do not eat food items that contain a lot of calories, such as soft drinks, oily food, chips, cakes, biscuits, and sweets.
If you feel hungry between meals avoid eating junk food and eat fruits, vegetables and low-calorie foods.
Regular exercise will help prevent weight gain.
If you maintain good eating habits and exercise regularly, you might not gain any weight.
Can the use of Antgaba NT 100 Tablet affect my sexual life?
The use of Antgaba NT 100 Tablet can affect the sexual life of both men and women.
Most commonly observed problems are decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction (inability to develop or maintain erection during the sexual activity) and inability to reach orgasm.
It can also cause a decrease in satisfaction and cause discomfort while intercourse.
If you experience these problems, discuss them with your doctor but do not stop taking Antgaba NT 100 Tablet.
Are there any serious side effects associated with the use of Antgaba NT 100 Tablet?
Serious side effects because of Antgaba NT 100 Tablet are uncommon and rare.
Consult your doctor immediately if you notice any of the following: changes in body temperature, difficulty in breathing, increased heartbeat (palpitations), weakness, unsteadiness when walking, reduced coordination or slowed reactions, unusual changes in mood or behavior (such as restlessness, nervousness or excitement), signs of depression, seeing or hearing things that are not there, irrational thinking, blurred or double vision, uncontrollable jerky eye movements, difficulty seeing, signs of frequent infections such as fever, severe chills, sore throat or mouth ulcers.
These side effects are uncommon but may be serious and need urgent medical attention.
How long will the Antgaba NT 100 Tablet take to act?
An initial benefit with Antgaba NT 100 Tablet may be seen after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, it may take around 2-3 months to see full benefit.
It may even take longer in some patients.
=

How can I know that my child is having a worm infection?
If your child complains of an itchy bottom (rectal area), difficulty sitting, fatigue, and restless sleep due to anal itching or persistent stomach pain with loss of appetite or frequent indigestion, it might indicate worm infestation.
Another sign of worm infection is pica in which you may notice your child eating inedible substances such as mud.
Speak to your child’s doctor as soon as you notice any of these in your child.
The doctor may ask for your child’s stool and blood samples on 3 different days for examination.
Depending upon the reports, the doctor will decide upon the treatment and prescribe your child with medicine.
How can my child become infected with intestinal worms?
Children typically harbor the highest intensity of infection.
The infection can be transmitted from the eggs of worms present in human feces which contaminate soil in areas with poor sanitation.
Transmission can occur by drinking contaminated water or by eating contaminated vegetables and fruits without washing or peeling.
Your child may also get infected by playing in the soil that is contaminated with the eggs of the worms.
When your child returns home after playing, ask them to clean up using soap and water.
Deworming is the process of killing and expelling worms from the body.
Anthel 200mg Suspension is widely used for the deworming treatment for children.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Anthel 200mg Suspension?
You can give your child medicines meant to relieve pain and fever unless your doctor has told you not to.
However, there do exist some medicines that should not be given with Anthel 200mg Suspension.
So, to negate the risk of any side effects, talk to your child’s doctor before giving any other medicines to your child.
What is the best time to give Anthel 200mg Suspension to my child?
Anthel 200mg Suspension can be given at any time of the day just remember to give it with a fat-containing food such as milk.
Who should not take Anthel 200mg Suspension?
Anthel 200mg Suspension should not be given to children with known allergy to albendazole or any other similar medicines like mebendazole or thiabendazole, in the past.
Signs of an allergic reaction may include an itchy skin rash, shortness of breath, and swelling of the face or tongue.
Let the doctor know about all of your child’s medical conditions before giving the medicine.
Let the doctor also know about any other medicines that your child is taking for any other conditions, as they may affect or be affected by this medicine.
=

What is Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Will Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking a higher dose of this medicine than recommended will not make it more effective.
Consuming higher than the recommended dose of Antiaus M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Is Antichol 2mg Tablet a narcotic? Can I get high after taking Antichol 2mg Tablet?
No, Antichol 2mg Tablet is not a narcotic.
However, its hallucinogenic and euphoriant properties may make the people abuse its use.
Does Antichol 2mg Tablet make you drowsy?
Yes, Antichol 2mg Tablet may cause drowsiness in some cases.
Some people may even experience difficulty in falling asleep.
Do not drive or operate heavy machinery when you experience drowsiness or if it causes blurring of vision, dizziness, mild nausea and mental confusion.
What happens if more than the recommended doses of Antichol 2mg Tablet are taken?
Taking more than the recommended doses of Antichol 2mg Tablet may cause flushing of the skin, nausea, vomiting, dilated pupils, increased heartbeat, rapid respiration, fever, increase in blood pressure, and dryness of mouth, tongue and skin.
A rash may appear on the face or upper trunk.
You may also experience restlessness, confusion, hallucinations, paranoid and psychotic reactions, incoordination, delirium (a state of mental confusion and emotional disruption) and occasionally convulsions.
Does Antichol 2mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Antichol 2mg Tablet may cause weight gain.
If you are concerned about your weight gain, consult a dietician for diet plan, exercise regularly, and eat a healthy and nutritious diet.
Can I crush Antichol 2mg Tablet?
No, Antichol 2mg Tablet should not be crushed.
It should be swallowed as a whole with a glass of water.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure about how to take this medicine.
Can I take Antichol 2mg Tablet with food?
Antichol 2mg Tablet may be taken before or after meals according to the effects experienced by the patient.
If Antichol 2mg Tablet tends to dry the mouth excessively, it may be better to take it before meals, unless it causes nausea.
If taken after meals, it may cause induced thirst which can be reduced by peppermint, chewing gum, or water.
=

Anticold Oral Drops is a combination of two medicines that help to relieve the symptoms of cold.
It consists of Chlorpheniramine, an antiallergic that relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes, and sneezing.
It also consists of Phenylephrine, a decongestant that narrows the small blood vessels providing relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Anticold Oral Drops?
Anticold Oral Drops is safe for most of the patients when taken according to the dose and duration recommended by the doctor.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, headache, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can the use of Anticold Oral Drops cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Anticold Oral Drops can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Anticold Oral Drops cause sleepiness or dizziness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Anticold Oral Drops is drowsiness.
Avoid driving, operating heavy machinery or engaging in other activities that need your full attention, unless your healthcare provider has permitted you to do so.
Do not drink alcohol or other cough and cold medicines.
Also, avoid taking medicines that help you sleep while taking Anticold Oral Drops as it may lead to excessive drowsiness.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Anticold Oral Drops can lead to increased side effects due to overdose.
Do not start, stop or change the dosage of your medicine before consulting your doctor.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Antigram Dry Syrup?
Antigram Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Antigram Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Antigram Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Antigram Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Antigram Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Antigram Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

How quickly does Antilep 400mg Tablet CR start working?
Your symptoms may take 1-2 weeks to improve.
However, in some cases, it may take even longer.
Consult your doctor if your condition doesn't improve or if you have any doubts regarding your condition.
Is Antilep 400mg Tablet CR an analgesic? What is it used for?
No, Antilep 400mg Tablet CR is not an analgesic and should not be used for regular aches or pains.
It is an anti-epileptic medicine which is used to treat fits (seizures).
It is also used in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (intense facial nerve pain).
In addition to that, Antilep 400mg Tablet CR is used to control mood disorders when other medicines fail to work.
What should I tell my doctor before taking Antilep 400mg Tablet CR?
Inform your doctor if you are taking any other medicines including medicines for epilepsy or seizures, medicines used to thin your blood (e.g., warfarin), medicines to control bacterial infection (e.g., chloramphenicol, metronidazole and doxycycline) and medicines to control viral infection (e.g., nelfinavir).
Also, let your doctor know if you take asthma medicines (e.g., theophylline and montelukast), birth control pills, etc.
It is important to tell your doctor if you are planning to become pregnant or are breastfeeding.
Further, you should tell the doctor if you have ever had liver problems, kidney problems, lung problems or porphyria (a rare blood pigment disorder).
What are the long-term effects of Antilep 400mg Tablet CR?
The long-term side effects of Antilep 400mg Tablet CR vary from person to person.
While some people can take Antilep 400mg Tablet CR safely for several years, some may develop side effects on using it for long term.
These side effects include osteoporosis and osteopenia in which the bones become weak and can get easily fractured.
Therefore, if you have been prescribed Antilep 400mg Tablet CR for a long term, get your bone density checked at regular intervals, maintain a healthy diet and exercise daily.
What should I avoid while taking Antilep 400mg Tablet CR?
Antilep 400mg Tablet CR may make you sleepy or you may feel dizzy.
Therefore, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Alcohol consumption should be avoided since taking both together may cause excessive sleepiness.
=

What if I vomit after taking Antimol 650 Tablet DT?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Antimol 650 Tablet DT tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Antimol 650 Tablet DT?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Antimol 650 Tablet DT.
How often can I take the Antimol 650 Tablet DT?
You should only take four doses of Antimol 650 Tablet DT in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Antimol 650 Tablet DT for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Antimol 650 Tablet DT make babies sleepy?
No, Antimol 650 Tablet DT does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Antimol 650 Tablet DT safe for children?
Antimol 650 Tablet DT is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
Is Antimol 650 Tablet DT an antibiotic?
No, Antimol 650 Tablet DT is not an antibiotic.
It works as a painkiller and fever-reducing medicine.
Can I take Antimol 650 Tablet DT and ibuprofen together?
Ibuprofen and Antimol 650 Tablet DT are safe medicines, but both should not be used together.
Consult your doctor if you are not sure.
=

Is Antipen 100mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Antipen 100mg Tablet is not an antibiotic, it belongs to the class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug) which helps in relieving pain associated with various disease conditions.
Can I take Antipen 100mg Tablet with paracetamol?
Antipen 100mg Tablet and paracetamol belong to the same class of medicines known as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drugs).
Taking the two medicines together is not advisable as it may increase the potential for gastric ulceration and bleeding.
However, please consult your doctor before using the two medicines together.
Does Antipen 100mg Tablet contain aspirin?
Antipen 100mg Tablet is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs; pain-relieving drug).
Antipen 100mg Tablet is safe to use if taken at prescribed dose and duration as advised by your doctor.
Can I take Antipen 100mg Tablet for headache?
Antipen 100mg Tablet can be taken for a headache only when advised by your doctor.
=

What if I give too much of Antipod 50 Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Antipod 50 Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Antipod 50 Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Antipod 50 Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Antipod 50 Dry Syrup?
Antipod 50 Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Antipod 50 Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Antipod 50 Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Antipod 50 Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
My child is having a sore throat and ear infection.
More than 80% of sore throats and ear infections are caused by a virus and antibiotics are not given for viral infections.
If your child has a sore throat, runny nose, a barky cough, pain, and discharge from the ear, it is most likely because of a virus.
Consult your child’s doctor to seek guidance.
=

Can I stop taking Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued if there is no pain.
However, it should be continued if advised by doctor.
Can the use of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy or salty.
Can the use of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Use of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects.
If the recommended doses do not relieve the pain or if you experience increased severity of the pain, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Antispas-K 20mg/50mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can I stop taking Antitus Syrup on my own if my cough reduces?
Do not stop taking Antitus Syrup on your own as it may worsen cough or cause recurring symptoms.
Therefore, take Antitus Syrup for as long as your doctor has prescribed it.
Diarrhea could be a side-effect of Antitus Syrup.
Stick to simple meals, avoid rich or spicy food, and drink plenty of water while taking Antitus Syrup.
Consult your doctor if you have severe diarrhea.
Does Antitus Syrup cause irregular heartbeat?
Antitus Syrup may cause palpitations or increased heartbeat.
A minor fluctuation in the heart rate should not be a worry.
You can monitor your heart rate regularly while taking Antitus Syrup and consult your doctor if you notice any major changes in heart rate.
How will I know if Antitus Syrup is working?
When you take this medicine, you may notice an increase in thin watery mucus from your air passages.
This is an indication that it is working as it is helping to remove mucus by making it easier to cough up.
Is Antitus Syrup good for dry cough?
Antitus Syrup is more effective in the treatment of productive cough associated with thickened mucus.
Consult your doctor to prescribe you the right medication for dry cough.
=

Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Clonazepam and Escitalopram.
This combination is used to treat anxiety disorders.
Clonazepam works by decreasing abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
Escitalopram works by increasing the amount of serotonin, a natural substance in the brain that helps to improve mood.
Can the Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet cause sleepiness or drowsiness?
Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet may make you feel drowsy or you may fall asleep suddenly during your routine activities like watching television, talking, eating or riding in a car.
You might not feel drowsy or have any other warning signs before you suddenly fall asleep.
Avoid driving a car, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities at the beginning of your treatment until you know how the medication affects you.
Inform your doctor if you experience such symptoms.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Any special instruction regarding storage and disposal of Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet?
Keep Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet in a container that is tightly closed and out of children's reach.
Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Unneeded medications should be disposed of in special ways to ensure that pets, children and other people cannot consume them.
Can I stop taking Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, you should not stop taking Antixiety 0.25mg/5mg Tablet even if you feel well.
Continue taking your medicine as advised.
Your doctor may lower your dose gradually if your symptoms are improving.
=

What is Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet?
The use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Antocare D 10mg/40mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

What if I give too much Antof OR Dry Syrup by mistake?
Though an extra dose of Antof OR Dry Syrup is unlikely to harm, you must immediately speak to the doctor.
The reason being, overdose may cause unwanted side effects such as seizures, tremors, severe headache, sudden weakness, unconsciousness, and palpitations (irregularities of heartbeat).
In case you notice any of these side effects, rush to your child’s doctor on an immediate basis.
My child is one year old and is suffering from a neurological disorder.
Is it safe to give Antof OR Dry Syrup?
Usually, Antof OR Dry Syrup does not enter into the central nervous system and lacks the potential to cause serious side effects such as neurotoxicity.
However, if given to children aged less than 2 years of age, it may enter the brain as they have underdeveloped membranes.
Consult your child’s doctor before giving Antof OR Dry Syrup in such a condition.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Antof OR Dry Syrup?
Antof OR Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Antof OR Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
My child is suffering from long-term (chronic) diarrhea.
Can I give Antof OR Dry Syrup?
The use of Antof OR Dry Syrup in chronic diarrhea has not been sufficiently studied.
Therefore, it is best to consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Antof OR Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
=

Antop-DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Antop-DSR Capsule?
Antop-DSR Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Antop-DSR Capsule?
The use of Antop-DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Antop-DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antop-DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Antop-DSR Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Antop-DSR Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Antop-DSR Capsule?
=

Is Antoxid E Softgel Capsule good for skin?
Antoxid E Softgel Capsule is very good for the skin.
It protects against harmful ultraviolet rays, prevents any sunburns or tanning, nourishes skin with essential antioxidants and combats ageing.
Its antioxidant effects destroy any harmful toxins, moisturise your skin and make your skin smooth and healthy.
It will also prevent fine lines, wrinkles and other signs of ageing.
This improves your appearance and boosts your self-confidence too.
What foods contain vitamin E naturally?
There are many food items that contain vitamin E naturally.
They are vegetable oils (such as wheat germ, sunflower, safflower, corn, and soybean oils), nuts (such as almonds, peanuts, walnut, and hazelnut), green leafy vegetables (such as spinach and broccoli), cereals, fruit juices etc.
Taking such foods in your daily diet will help you get more vitamin E and improve your overall health.
Does Antoxid E Softgel Capsule improve immunity?
Antoxid E Softgel Capsule helps improve immunity.
It strengthens your immune system, and increases your ability to fight infections.
The antioxidants that are present in Antoxid E Softgel Capsule, prevent any harmful toxins from damaging the various organs in our body.
Can I take Antoxid E Softgel Capsule in pregnancy?
There is no clarity on the use of Antoxid E Softgel Capsule in pregnancy.
However, if you are pregnant or planning to conceive, consult your doctor before taking Antoxid E Softgel Capsule.
You may take it only if prescribed by your doctor.
Is it safe to take Antoxid E Softgel Capsule daily?
Antoxid E Softgel Capsule is safe to be taken daily.
However, it should be taken in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Should I avoid taking any medicines with Antoxid E Softgel Capsule?
Yes, there are some medicines that should be avoided or used with caution while taking Antoxid E Softgel Capsule like, oral contraceptives, blood thinners, or medicines used to treat certain bleeding disorders.
Make sure to inform your doctor if you ever had a blood clot (thrombosis), or if you suffer from a bleeding condition caused due to lack of vitamin K.
=

What is Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Drotaverine and Mefenamic acid.
This medication helps to relieve abdominal pain.
Drotaverine relieves muscle spasms associated with smooth muscles in the abdomen.
Mefenamic Acid works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (swelling).
Is it safe to use Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients with abdominal pain.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
Talk to your doctor if you have vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark coloured and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Avoid spicy, salty and acidic foods (like lemons).
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, do not take a higher than the recommended dose of Antraus D 80mg/250mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Antuc 20mg Injection used for?
Antuc 20mg Injection is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Antuc 20mg Injection also prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
Antuc 20mg Injection is also helpful as a preanesthetic medication (medicine given just before anesthesia) to reduce the chances of aspiration related complications like lung injury.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Antuc 20mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
It also helps to cut down on caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
Does Antuc 20mg Injection cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Antuc 20mg Injection can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Antuc 20mg Injection decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
What other lifestyle changes should I make to get maximum benefit of Antuc 20mg Injection?
You make see better results if you make certain dietary and lifestyle changes while taking Antuc 20mg Injection.
You can consult your dietician to get a diet chart that suits you best.
Eat at least 3 hours before sleeping to reduce the chances of aggravation of your symptoms at night.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
Refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee, and cola.
Alcohol intake and smoking should also be avoided as they may worsen your symptoms.
Can I take alcohol with Antuc 20mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Antuc 20mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Antuc 20mg Injection, but it can increase acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
=

Is Anucef O 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Anucef O 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Anucef O 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anucef O 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Anucef O 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Anucef O 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Anucef O 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Anucef O 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Anucef O 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Anucef O 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anucef O 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Anucef O 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Anucef O 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Anucef O 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Anucef O 200mg Tablet treat UTI?
=

Is Anudef 6mg Tablet a steroid?
Yes, Anudef 6mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
These glucocorticoids help to maintain health and wellbeing.
Anudef 6mg Tablet increases the corticosteroids levels in the body which helps in treating various illnesses involving inflammation (redness, tenderness, heat and swelling).
What is Anudef 6mg Tablet used for?
Anudef 6mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used for treating conditions like allergy diseases, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory skin diseases and autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
The medicine also helps transplant patients as it suppresses the immune system so that the body does not reject the organ.
How does Anudef 6mg Tablet work?
Anudef 6mg Tablet is a steroid medicine also known as glucocorticoids which occur naturally in the body.
The medicine works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
Also, it stops the reactions known as autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Is Anudef 6mg Tablet better than Prednisone?
Clinical studies have shown that Anudef 6mg Tablet has a similar effect as that of prednisone.
Moreover, Anudef 6mg Tablet is better tolerated when used in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
However, consult your doctor for the right treatment of your condition.
Is Anudef 6mg Tablet a painkiller?
No, Anudef 6mg Tablet is not a painkiller.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as steroids.
Can I take Anudef 6mg Tablet with Tamsulosin?
Yes, Anudef 6mg Tablet can be taken with Tamsulosin.
No harmful effects or any other interactions have been reported when they are used together.
=

What is Anupan 40mg Injection used for?
Anupan 40mg Injection is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Anupan 40mg Injection prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with Anupan 40mg Injection?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Anupan 40mg Injection.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Anupan 40mg Injection.
How long does it take for Anupan 40mg Injection to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Anupan 40mg Injection to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Does Anupan 40mg Injection cause weight gain?
Although rare but long-term treatment with Anupan 40mg Injection may cause weight gain.
The reason could be the relief from reflux symptoms which could make you eat more.
Consult your doctor for any weight-related concern.
Can I take alcohol with Anupan 40mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Anupan 40mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Anupan 40mg Injection, but it can increase the acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Anupan 40mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
You must refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
=

Can the use of Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection takes to work?
Usually, Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anvicft-S 1.5 Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

What if I give too much of Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange by mistake?
An extra dose of Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange is unlikely to do harm.
However, you must still be vigilant because overdoses may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
If you think you have given too much of Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange to your child, speak to a doctor immediately.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange?
Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Can Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the medicine may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad ones, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
Yes, the infection-causing bacteria can become resistant to Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange because of irregular dosing, unrequired repeated use, and misuse of Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange can lead to resistance.
Resistant bacteria are no longer killed by the antibiotics and may lead to reinfection.
What should I tell the doctor before giving Anvifix-O Dry Syrup Orange to my child?
=

Is Anvipod 200 Tablet DT safe to use?
Anvipod 200 Tablet DT is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Anvipod 200 Tablet DT cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anvipod 200 Tablet DT can cause diarrhea.
Anvipod 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Anvipod 200 Tablet DT an antibiotic?
Yes, Anvipod 200 Tablet DT is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Anvipod 200 Tablet DT cause constipation?
Yes, Anvipod 200 Tablet DT may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Anvipod 200 Tablet DT when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anvipod 200 Tablet DT before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Anvipod 200 Tablet DT take to work?
Usually, Anvipod 200 Tablet DT starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
What if I do not get better after using Anvipod 200 Tablet DT?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can Anvipod 200 Tablet DT treat UTI?
Yes, Anvipod 200 Tablet DT may be used to treat UTI (Urinary Tract Infection).
Studies suggest that it has better tolerance and helps to treat symptoms of UTI such as foul smelling urine, frequent urination, vaginal irritation, vaginal discharge, stomach pain, etc., effectively.
However, not everyone may be prescribed Anvipod 200 Tablet DT.
It is advisable to take it only if prescribed by a doctor.
=

Anvocet-M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Anvocet-M Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Anvocet-M Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Anvocet-M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Anvocet-M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Anvocet-M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anvocet-M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Anvocet-M Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Anvocet-M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Anvocet-M Tablet.
=

After how many days of taking Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR will I start feeling better?
You may start to see an improvement in your symptoms after 1-2 weeks of starting the treatment.
In case you do not see any improvement, do not stop the medicine and consult your doctor.
It may take around 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of the medicine.
I feel that my symptoms have worsened after having started taking Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR.
Can I stop it on my own or do I need to consult the doctor?
No, do not stop taking Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR abruptly, without consulting your doctor.
This is a common problem with Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR that initially you may feel that your symptoms have worsened but the benefits start appearing after 1-2 weeks.
If the worsening does not improve even after 1-2 weeks, you must consult your doctor.
Can Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR affect my sex life?
Yes, Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR use may affect your sex life.
It can cause decreased sexual desire and inability to reach orgasm in both men and women.
Additionally, men may even experience abnormal erection and ejaculation.
What is the effect of Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR on children?
Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR should not be used in children under 18 years of age.
The reason being, patients under 18 have an increased risk of experiencing side effects such as suicidal thoughts, aggression, oppositional behavior and anger when they take Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR.
If your doctor has prescribed Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR for your child and you are worried about these side effects, discuss it with your doctor.
I have been taking tamoxifen for breast cancer.
Can I take Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR with it?
No, you should not take Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR if you are receiving tamoxifen.
Tamoxifen often causes hot flashes (episodes of feeling extremely hot), which can be treated with Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR.
But Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR may reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen and can lead to recurrence of breast cancer.
Do I need to be careful while taking Anxetin 25mg Tablet CR if I am a diabetic?
=

Does Anxicool 1mg Tablet have abuse potential?
Yes, there are several reports mentioning the abuse potential of Anxicool 1mg Tablet.
Therefore, it should be used with caution in patients prone to drug abuse.
What are the advantages of Anxicool 1mg Tablet over other benzodiazepines (BZDs)?
As compared to other benzodiazepines, Anxicool 1mg Tablet has lesser sedative effects, lower dependence, and lower tolerance.
However, long-term use can reduce the effectivity of the medicine and may cause dependence and addiction.
What happens if you stop taking Anxicool 1mg Tablet suddenly?
Stopping Anxicool 1mg Tablet suddenly may cause withdrawal symptoms which may include anxiety, insomnia, headache, dizziness, ringing sound in ear (tinnitus), eating disorder (anorexia), vomiting, nausea, tremor, weakness, excessive sweating (perspiration), irritability, hypersensitivity to visual and auditory stimuli.
Stopping the medicine suddenly may also cause palpitations, fast heart rate and postural hypotension (drop in blood pressure on standing).
In severe and rare cases of withdrawal from high doses, patients may develop seizures, mental disorder (psychosis), agitation, confusion, and hallucinations.
How long does Anxicool 1mg Tablet take to work?
Oral doses of Anxicool 1mg Tablet begin working within 30-60 minutes and peak at 3-4 hours.
The medicine remains in the body for 6-8 hours although higher doses can last longer.
Is Anxicool 1mg Tablet a muscle relaxant?
Yes, like benzodiazepines, it causes muscle relaxation, but otherwise it is mainly used for anxiety.
Is Anxicool 1mg Tablet good for sleep?
Like other benzodiazepines, it causes sleepiness but is mainly used for anxiety disorder.
It increases total sleep time and decreases the proportion of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, wherein your eyes move quickly in different directions.
Anxicool 1mg Tablet had no effect on sleep latency (amount of time it takes you to go from being fully awake to being asleep).
=

Can I stop taking Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, you should continue taking Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet even if you feel well.
If you stop Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal problems may occur.
Your doctor will decrease your dose gradually before asking you to stop Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet.
Can the use of Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anxifit Beta 50mg/20mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR used for?
Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR safe?
Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR an opioid?
No, Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR an anti-depressant?
No, Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR a narcotic substance?
No, Anxigo 0.5mg Tablet SR is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

What is Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet used for?
Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Anxiless 0.5mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

Is Anxionil 2mg Tablet an opioid? Is it a habit-forming medicine?
No, Anxionil 2mg Tablet is not an opioid.
It belongs to the benzodiazepine group of medicines and is used for short-term treatment (2-4 weeks) only.
It is a habit-forming medicine and can make a person physically and psychologically dependent.
Can Anxionil 2mg Tablet be used as a sleeping pill?
Anxionil 2mg Tablet is used for sleeping difficulties caused due to short-term anxiety.
One of the very common side effects of Anxionil 2mg Tablet is drowsiness and sleepiness.
It calms the mind, and therefore, helps a person to sleep.
For how long will Anxionil 2mg Tablet stay in my system?
Anxionil 2mg Tablet may take around 3 days to get completely removed from the system.
Are there any symptoms that I would experience if I get addicted to Anxionil 2mg Tablet?
The most important symptom of addiction is that you may feel unpleasant if you do not take Anxionil 2mg Tablet.
Another symptom could be that you may increase the dose on your own to feel its effect.
If I suddenly stop taking Anxionil 2mg Tablet, will it affect me adversely?
You should reduce the dose of Anxionil 2mg Tablet gradually before completely stopping it.
Suddenly stopping it may lead to withdrawal symptoms which include loss of the sense of reality, feeling detached from life, and unable to feel emotion.
Some patients have also experienced numbness or tingling in the arms or legs, tinnitus (ringing sounds in the ears), uncontrolled or overactive movements, twitching, shaking, feeling sick, being sick, stomach upsets or stomach pain, loss of appetite, agitation and abnormally fast heart beats.
It can also cause panic attacks, dizziness or feeling faint, memory loss, hallucinations, feeling stiff and unable to move easily, feeling very warm, convulsions (sudden uncontrolled shaking or jerking of the body) and oversensitivity to light, sound and touch.
=

What is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet used for?
Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet safe?
Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet an opioid?
No, Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
Is Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet a narcotic substance?
No, Anxit 0.5 SR Tablet is not a narcotic substance.
It belongs to the class of medicines known as benzodiazepines and is used for the treatment of anxiety.
=

Can I stop taking Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, you should continue to take Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet even if you feel well.
If you stop taking Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet suddenly, serious withdrawal problems may occur.
Consult your doctor instead of stopping it yourself, your doctor might decrease your dose gradually.
Can the use of Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet can make you feel sleepy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities till you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Anxit Fort 0.5 mg/25 mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Anxorax 10mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Anxorax 10mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
Anxorax 10mg Tablet effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Anxorax 10mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does Anxorax 10mg Tablet work for allergies?
Anxorax 10mg Tablet works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of Anxorax 10mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Anxorax 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Anxorax 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Anxorax 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Anxorax 10mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anxorax 10mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

Is Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet a sleeping pill?
Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet belongs to a class of medicines called benzodiazepines and is used to treat anxiety, stop seizures (fits) or relax tense muscles.
This can also help relieve difficulty sleeping (insomnia), and is usually prescribed for a short period of time, if used to treat sleeping problems.
You should take it in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Does Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet cause sleepiness? If yes, then should I stop driving while taking Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet?
Yes, Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet causes drowsiness very commonly.
It also causes forgetfulness and affects muscular function which may adversely affect your ability to drive.
Sometimes, drowsiness persists even on the following day.
So, in case Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet makes you sleepy and affects your alertness, you should avoid driving.
For how long should I take Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet?
The duration of treatment with Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet is mainly as short as possible.
Your doctor will evaluate you after 4 weeks of treatment in order to assess the need for continuation of treatment, especially if you do not have any symptoms.
Before taking you off this medicine, your doctor may gradually decrease your dose to prevent any withdrawal side effects.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
Is it safe to take Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet and alcohol together?
No, it is not at all recommended to take alcohol with Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet since it can cause breathing problems, sleepiness and heart problems.
Taking Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet with alcohol may make you sleepy and your breathing may become so shallow that you may not wake up.
This may even lead to death.
People taking Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet in high doses or for a long term may become addicted to it.
Also, people with a history of alcoholism and drug abuse are more likely to become addicted to Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet.
Therefore, Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet should be taken for the shortest possible time and in the lowest effective dose.
Can I stop taking Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet if I start feeling better?
No, do not stop taking Anxrea 0.5mg Tablet suddenly as you may experience withdrawal effects like depression, nervousness, difficulty in sleeping, irritability, sweating, upset stomach or diarrhea.
Stopping it suddenly may even bring back the symptoms and make them harder to treat.
You may also experience mood changes, anxiety, restlessness and changes in sleep patterns.
These effects may occur even after taking low doses for a short period of time.
=

Can I get Anytime 100mg Jelly without a prescription?
No, you need a doctor's prescription to get Anytime 100mg Jelly since it is a prescription medicine.
Your doctor will prescribe it only if they judge that it would be beneficial for you.
Can I take Anytime 100mg Jelly for premature ejaculation?
No, Anytime 100mg Jelly is not known to have any beneficial effects in treating premature ejaculation.
It is used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.
Can I take Anytime 100mg Jelly for the rest of my life?
Anytime 100mg Jelly is a prescription medicine and should only be taken for the duration that is advised by your doctor.
Why is the use of Anytime 100mg Jelly contraindicated with nitrates?
Use of Anytime 100mg Jelly is harmful for patients taking nitrates or blood pressure-lowering medicines as their combined use can cause a severe fall in blood pressure, which can also result in death.
However, if these medicines are to be taken together then it is advised to keep a time gap of 24 hours between the intake of Penegra and blood pressure-lowering medicines.
Why does Anytime 100mg Jelly cause a fall in blood pressure (hypotension)?
Anytime 100mg Jelly has the property of relaxing the smooth muscle of the blood vessels and widening them which can cause a fall in blood pressure (hypotension).
So, when used with blood pressure lowering medicines or nitrates, it can cause a severe fall in blood pressure, which could be fatal.
Anytime 100mg Jelly should not be taken if you are taking nitrates for chest pain or you have a history of heart attack or stroke in the past 6 months.
Can I take Anytime 100mg Jelly in my twenties?
Yes, if prescribed by your doctor then Anytime 100mg Jelly can be taken in your twenties.
Does Anytime 100mg Jelly affect fertility?
No, Anytime 100mg Jelly does not affect fertility, neither negatively nor positively.
Does Anytime 100mg Jelly affect sperm?
Anytime 100mg Jelly does not affect sperm count or its health.
It is a medicine that is used to treat erectile dysfunction.
Does Anytime 100mg Jelly increase blood pressure?
No, Anytime 100mg Jelly is not associated with an increase in blood pressure.
However, it can cause a decrease in blood pressure especially if taken with other blood pressure-lowering medications.
Please consult your doctor before taking Anytime 100mg Jelly with any other medicine.
Can I take Anytime 100mg Jelly as often as I want?
=

What if I don't get better after using Anzalevo AZ 250mg/250mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Anzalevo AZ 250mg/250mg Tablet as soon you as remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
=

How long does it take for Anzfree 5mg Tablet to work?
Usually, it will take about 2-4 weeks before you start feeling better, however, full benefits may take a little longer.
Therefore, do not stop taking Anzfree 5mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Talk to your doctor if taking the medicine does not make you feel better or you feel worse even after taking the medicine.
What are the most common side effects of Anzfree 5mg Tablet?
The most common side effects of Anzfree 5mg Tablet are headache and nausea.
Other common side effects include blocked or runny nose, decreased or increased appetite, anxiety, restlessness, and abnormal dreams.
You may also experience sleepiness or difficulty falling asleep, dizziness, yawning, tremors, diarrhea, or constipation.
Other side effects of Anzfree 5mg Tablet may be vomiting, dry mouth, increased sweating, fatigue, fever, increase in weight, and pain in muscles and joints.
Using this medicine may even cause delayed ejaculation, problems with erection, decreased sexual drive and women may experience difficulty in achieving orgasm.
What is Anzfree 5mg Tablet used for?
Anzfree 5mg Tablet is used to treat depression and anxiety disorders such as social phobia, anxiety disorder, panic attacks, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
The use of Anzfree 5mg Tablet in children, adolescents, and young adults may increase their risk of experiencing suicidal tendencies.
You should always discuss the risks and benefits of taking Anzfree 5mg Tablet with your doctor before taking it.
Remember that children younger than 12 years of age should not be given Anzfree 5mg Tablet.
Is Anzfree 5mg Tablet better taken at night or in the morning?
It is usually recommended to take Anzfree 5mg Tablet once a day in the morning since it can keep you awake if taken late at night.
You can take it with or without food.
You should prefer to take it at the same time each day so that you remember to take it.
Can I stop taking Anzfree 5mg Tablet on my own?
Anzfree 5mg Tablet should not be stopped abruptly as it may cause withdrawal symptoms.
Though the withdrawal symptoms are usually mild and disappear within 2 weeks, it is not recommended to stop it without consulting your doctor.
You should rather consult your doctor who will reduce the dose gradually.
=

What is Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Anzifen MR 100mg/325mg/250mg Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

What is Anzine 10mg Tablet? What is it used for?
Anzine 10mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
Anzine 10mg Tablet effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Anzine 10mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does Anzine 10mg Tablet work for allergies?
Anzine 10mg Tablet works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of Anzine 10mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Anzine 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Anzine 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Anzine 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Anzine 10mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Anzine 10mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

What is Anzipred 4mg Tablet used for?
Anzipred 4mg Tablet has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat conditions like allergic conditions, anaphylaxis, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory skin diseases.
It is also helpful in treating autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage) and certain eye disorders.
How does Anzipred 4mg Tablet work?
Anzipred 4mg Tablet works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses caused due to active inflammation.
In addition to that, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
Anzipred 4mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Anzipred 4mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Anzipred 4mg Tablet?
Anzipred 4mg Tablet effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Anzipred 4mg Tablet in the dose that suits your requirement.
Do not alter your dose thinking that a higher dose will provide faster relief.
Rather, you may end up having undesirable side effects.
Be patient, and follow your doctor’s instructions regarding the use of Anzipred 4mg Tablet.
Consult your doctor if you do not see improvement in your condition even after completing the full course of treatment.
What if I forget to take a dose of Anzipred 4mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Anzipred 4mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose on the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Anzipred 4mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

Anzol DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Anzol DSR Capsule?
Anzol DSR Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Anzol DSR Capsule?
The use of Anzol DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Anzol DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Anzol DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Anzol DSR Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anzol DSR Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Anzol DSR Capsule?
=

Anzy 500mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Anzy 500mg Tablet.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Anzy 500mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Anzy 500mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Anzy 500mg Tablet be taken at night?
Anzy 500mg Tablet is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Anzy 500mg Tablet exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Anzy 500mg Tablet to work?
Anzy 500mg Tablet starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Anzy 500mg Tablet given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Anzy 500mg Tablet is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Anzy 500mg Tablet?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Anzy 500mg Tablet should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Anzy 500mg Tablet.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Anzy 500mg Tablet increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Anzy 500mg Tablet a strong antibiotic?
Anzy 500mg Tablet is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Anzy 500mg Tablet has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
Can you get a yeast infection from taking Anzy 500mg Tablet?
Some people may get a fungal or yeast infection known as thrush after taking Anzy 500mg Tablet.
Antibiotics such as Anzy 500mg Tablet can kill the normal or ‘good bacteria’ of your intestine responsible for preventing thrush.
You should inform your doctor if you get a sore or vaginal itching or discharge.
Also, inform your doctor if you get a white patch in the mouth or tongue after taking Anzy 500mg Tablet or soon after stopping it.
=

Can the use of Aoflo 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aoflo 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Aoflo 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aoflo 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can the use of Aoflo 200mg Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, use of Aoflo 200mg Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle (achilies tendon).
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Aoflo 200mg Tablet.
=

Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup?
Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
With prolonged therapy, the doctor may monitor kidney and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can I give a higher than the recommended dose of Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup to my child?
No, giving a higher than recommended dose of this medicine can increase the risks of side effects.
If your child experiences increased severity of symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can I stop giving Aoxy-CV Duo Dry Syrup to my child when the symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop giving this medicine to your child unless the full course of the treatment is complete, even if you feel better.
The symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue giving the medicine for the due course as it may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Apache-MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Apache-MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Apache-MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Apache-MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Apache-MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Apache-MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Apache-MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Apache-MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apache-MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Apache-MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Apache-MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
=

How long does Apale Tablet take to work?
Apale Tablet usually starts working within a few hours of taking it.
If you are taking it for iron deficiency anemia, you may start feeling better after a few weeks of taking it.
In case you are taking it during pregnancy, you may not notice any difference but this does not mean that the dose is not working.
Continue taking Apale Tablet for the duration recommended by your doctor.
Can Apale Tablet cause weight gain?
Animal studies on Apale Tablet suggest that taking the medicine in excess along with a high-fat diet may lead to weight gain and fat accumulation.
But this weight gain was not evident when taken along with a normal or low fat diet, even with excess Apale Tablet.
In humans, similar studies have not been conducted and therefore knowledge regarding weight gain is lacking.
Therefore, if you are on Apale Tablet then avoid excess Apale Tablet and eat a low fat meal to be on a safer side.
Why should women start taking Apale Tablet before they become pregnant?
Maintaining the right level of iron and folic acid in the body before getting pregnant reduces the risk of developing neural tube defects in the baby.
Neural tube effect, in most cases, is caused if the structure (neural tube) from which the central nervous system develops (brain and spinal cord) in a baby does not form or is only partially closed.
Full closure of the neural tube occurs during the end of the fourth week of pregnancy.
Folic acid helps in the formation of neural tubes.
Therefore, to prevent this defect women should start Apale Tablet before four weeks of pregnancy.
Can I breastfeed while taking Apale Tablet?
Yes, you can breastfeed while taking Apale Tablet as it is not harmful for the baby.
Apale Tablet contains folic acid as an active ingredient which is naturally found in the breast milk.
It also contains iron but iron does not pass through breast milk.
Though initial levels of folic acid in the breast milk are low, it rises eventually.
Since it is actively secreted in breast milk, mother may take Apale Tablet every day to maintain the required levels.
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions related to nutrient supplementation in breastfeeding.
When should I take Apale Tablet, in the morning or at night?
You can take Apale Tablet any time of the day, but try to take it at the same time each day.
This will help you remember to take it.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
The medicine should be swallowed as a whole with a glass of water.
Do not chew, cut or crush the medicine.
Can Apale Tablet make you sick?
Generally, Apale Tablet is well tolerated and no side effects are reported in the majority of people.
However, some may experience stomach and intestinal problems which include nausea (feeling sick), dark colored stools and stomach upset or digestion issues.
If you experience any of these symptoms, consult your doctor but do not stop taking Apale Tablet.
=

What is A Pandom 40mg Injection used for?
A Pandom 40mg Injection is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
A Pandom 40mg Injection prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with A Pandom 40mg Injection?
Yes, you can take antacids along with A Pandom 40mg Injection.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take A Pandom 40mg Injection.
How long does it take for A Pandom 40mg Injection to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for A Pandom 40mg Injection to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Does A Pandom 40mg Injection cause weight gain?
Although rare but long-term treatment with A Pandom 40mg Injection may cause weight gain.
The reason could be the relief from reflux symptoms which could make you eat more.
Consult your doctor for any weight-related concern.
Can I take alcohol with A Pandom 40mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with A Pandom 40mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of A Pandom 40mg Injection, but it can increase the acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
=

Apar-Plus Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Apar-Plus Tablet?
Apar-Plus Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Apar-Plus Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Apar-Plus Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Apar-Plus Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Apar-Plus Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Apar-Plus Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apar-Plus Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Apar-Plus Tablet?
The use of Apar-Plus Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Apar-Plus Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Apar-Plus Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Apar-Plus Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Is Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop a beta blocker?
No, Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop is not a beta blocker.
It is an alpha adrenergic agonist which means it acts on alpha adrenergic receptor present in the eye.
This medicine reduces the high pressure in the eye by decreasing the amount of fluid in the eyes.
It has minimal effect on heart and lungs.
Do Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop make you sleepy?
Yes, Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop may cause drowsiness and may also cause fatigue which may impair the ability to drive or use machinery.
It may also cause blurred or abnormal vision which could cause difficulty in driving or using machinery, especially at night or in reduced lighting.
You should avoid driving or using machinery until these symptoms have subsided.
Does Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop lower blood pressure?
Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop may cause low or high blood pressure.
Before taking Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop, inform your doctor if you are already taking any medicines to lower blood pressure.
Moreover, keep a regular check on your blood pressure while you are taking Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop.
Does Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop cause pupil dilation?
No, Apbidin P 0.15% Eye Drop does not cause pupil dilation.
On the contrary, in very rare cases, it may cause pupil constriction, also called miosis.
If you experience miosis, you may have night vision difficulty, halos and glare.
=

Apce-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Apce-P Tablet?
Apce-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Apce-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Apce-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Apce-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Apce-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Apce-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apce-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Apce-P Tablet?
The use of Apce-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Apce-P Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Apce-P Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Apce-P Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

For how long can Apcin 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Apcin 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Apcin 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Apcin 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Apcin 500mg Injection administered?
Apcin 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Apcin 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Apcin 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Apcin 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Apcin 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Apcin 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
Can I stop taking Apcin 500mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apcin 500mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I take alcohol while on Apcin 500mg Injection?
You should avoid alcohol while being on treatment with Apcin 500mg Injection.
Alcohol consumption may worsen the dizziness and sleepiness that might be caused by Apcin 500mg Injection.
However, if you do have alcohol and experience any side effects, consult your doctor.
=

Apcold Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Chlorpheniramine, Paracetamol / Acetaminophen and Phenylephrine.
This combination helps to relieve symptoms of cold like runny nose, watery eyes, fever and headache.
It relieves allergy symptoms like runny nose, watery eyes and sneezing.
Paracetamol blocks the release of certain chemical messengers in the brain that are responsible for pain and fever.
Phenylephrine is a decongestant which narrows the small blood vessels and provides relief from congestion or stuffiness in the nose.
Is it safe to use Apcold Syrup?
Yes, Apcold Syrup is safe in most patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, sleepiness, headache and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform the doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Can I stop taking Apcold Syrup when I am relieved of my symptoms?
Apcold Syrup is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your symptoms are relieved.
However, continue taking this medicine if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Apcold Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apcold Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Apcold Syrup cause damage to liver?
Apcold Syrup is usually safe when taken according to the recommended dose.
However, an overdose of Apcold Syrup can damage your liver.
Avoid drinking alcohol, while taking this medicine as it may increase your risk of liver damage.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Apcold Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Apdime T 250mg/31.25mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apdime T 250mg/31.25mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Apdime T 250mg/31.25mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Apdime T 250mg/31.25mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Apdime T 250mg/31.25mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
=

How long does Apdrops PD Eye Drop takes to work?
Usually, Apdrops PD Eye Drop starts working soon after applying it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can I stop taking Apdrops PD Eye Drop when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apdrops PD Eye Drop and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Can I stop using Apdrops PD Eye Drop when I feel better?
No, do not stop using Apdrops PD Eye Drop and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Apenosa-P Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Apenosa-P Tablet?
Apenosa-P Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Apenosa-P Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Apenosa-P Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Apenosa-P Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Apenosa-P Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Apenosa-P Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apenosa-P Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Apenosa-P Tablet?
The use of Apenosa-P Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Apepod 100 Tablet safe to use?
Apepod 100 Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Apepod 100 Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apepod 100 Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Apepod 100 Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Apepod 100 Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Apepod 100 Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Apepod 100 Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Apepod 100 Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Apepod 100 Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apepod 100 Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Apepod 100 Tablet take to work?
Usually, Apepod 100 Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
=

How long should I take Apexim O 100mg Tablet?
Apexim O 100mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Apexim O 100mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Apexim O 100mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apexim O 100mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Apexim O 100mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Apexim O 100mg Tablet effective?
Apexim O 100mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Apexim O 100mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Apexim O 100mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Apexim O 100mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apfide 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of Apgesic Oral Suspension for my child by myself according to the severity of illness?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Apgesic Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Apgesic Oral Suspension be stored?
Apgesic Oral Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Apgesic Oral Suspension?
Apgesic Oral Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Apgesic Oral Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
The dose will even change for your child when he/she becomes older.
Since the dose changes so unpredictably, you must never give any dose of this medicine to anyone without consulting a doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Apgesic Oral Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.
Keep giving this medicine to your child in the dose and frequency advised by the doctor and you’ll notice that the pain or fever will reduce and your child will start feeling better.
However, if your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
=

How long should I take Aphexine 200mg Tablet?
Aphexine 200mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Aphexine 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Aphexine 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aphexine 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Aphexine 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Aphexine 200mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aphexine 200mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Aphexine 200mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Aphexine 200mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Aphexine 200mg Tablet safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Aphexine 200mg Tablet is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
How long should I take Aphexine 200mg Tablet?
Aphexine 200mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

If I do not see an improvement in my symptoms, can I stop taking Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup?
No, do not stop taking Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup on your own.
Stopping it suddenly may have unwanted effects like twitching and jerking movements.
If Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup does not improve your symptoms, consult your doctor.
The doctor may suggest a slow reduction of Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup dose.
Who should avoid taking Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup?
You should not take Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup if you are allergic to Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup or any of the ingredients in the medicine.
Also, avoid taking Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup if your kidney functions are severely deranged or if you ever had localized bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhage).
You should also avoid taking this medicine if you are suffering from Huntington’s disease/chorea (a genetic disorder where the brain cells die quickly causing deterioration of mental and physical abilities over time).
What is the correct way of taking Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup?
Aphytam 500mg/5ml Syrup can be taken with or without food.
Swallow the tablets as a whole with a glass of water.
Do not break or chew the tablets.
If you find it difficult to swallow, tell your doctor as soon as possible.
=

Apicef 250mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Apicef 250mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Apicef 250mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Apicef 250mg Injection?
Apicef 250mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Apicef 250mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Apicef 250mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Apicef 250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Apicef 250mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Apicef 250mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Apicef 250mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Apicef 250mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
How is Apicef 250mg Injection administered?
Apicef 250mg Injection is administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Apicef 250mg Injection.
=

Is Apicord 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Apicord 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Apicord 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Apicord 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Apicord 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Apicord 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Apicord 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Apicord 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Apicord 10mg Tablet?
Apicord 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Apicord 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Apicord 10mg Tablet?
Apicord 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Apicord 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Can I drink milk while taking Apidox 100mg Capsule?
No, you should avoid using milk and milk products while taking Apidox 100mg Capsule.
Consuming dairy products along with Apidox 100mg Capsule can decrease its absorption from the stomach, which may lead to inadequate affect of this medicine.
How long after taking Apidox 100mg Capsule can I eat?
It is best to wait for 2 hours after consuming Apidox 100mg Capsule.
Consuming food along with Apidox 100mg Capsule may decrease its absorption from the stomach.
Can I take Apidox 100mg Capsule with food if its causing stomach upset?
Yes, you can take Apidox 100mg Capsule with food if its causing you stomach upset.
However, avoid consuming milk and milk products 1 hr before and 2 hr after taking this medicine.
How long does Apidox 100mg Capsule takes to work?
Usually, Apidox 100mg Capsule starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
Can the use of Apidox 100mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apidox 100mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
=

Can I cut the tablet of Apigat 2.5 Tablet?
If you have difficulty swallowing the whole tablet, the tablet may be crushed and mixed with water, or 5% dextrose in water, or apple juice or apple puree.
Remember to crush the medicine just before you take it.
What if I miss a dose of Apigat 2.5 Tablet?
If a dose is missed, the patient should take Apigat 2.5 Tablet immediately and then continue with twice daily intake as before.
What are the side effects of taking Apigat 2.5 Tablet?
Apigat 2.5 Tablet may cause bleeding in eyes, stomach, nose, etc and anemia which may cause tiredness or paleness.
It may also lower your blood pressure which may make you faint or have a quickened heartbeat and nausea.
Blood tests may show an increase in gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), which may be due to liver problems.
What is Apigat 2.5 Tablet used for?
Apigat 2.5 Tablet is used to reduce the risk of stroke and blood clots in people who have atrial fibrillation.
In atrial fibrillation, the heart beats irregularly, increasing the chance of clots forming in the body and possibly causing strokes.
Apigat 2.5 Tablet also helps to reduce the risk of forming a blood clot in the legs and lungs of people who have just had hip or knee replacement surgery and treat blood clots in the veins of your legs (deep vein thrombosis) or lungs (pulmonary embolism), and reduce the risk of them occurring again.
How dangerous is Apigat 2.5 Tablet?
While using Apigat 2.5 Tablet you should be aware of the risks involved such as it can cause excessive bleeding being a blood thinner.
Hence, do not stop taking the medication without speaking to your doctor.
If you have epidural or spinal anesthesia or a spinal puncture while taking Apigat 2.5 Tablet then you may be at risk of developing a blood clot in or around your spine which can result in paralysis in some patients.
Hence, inform the doctor beforehand if you have had any such procedure.
Do I need to stop Apigat 2.5 Tablet before surgery?
Consult your doctor who will tell you whether you have to stop it or not.
It will depend on the type of procedure involved.
For instance, if there is moderate to high risk of bleeding during the procedure you will have to stop taking Apigat 2.5 Tablet 48 hours before surgery.
Is Apigat 2.5 Tablet a blood thinner?
Yes, Apigat 2.5 Tablet belongs to a class of medicines known as anticoagulant or blood thinner.
It prevents your blood from clotting by preventing formation of an important component of blood clotting (factor Xa).
=

For how long can Apikacin 500mg Injection be taken?
The usual course of treatment with Apikacin 500mg Injection is about 7 to 10 days.
However, your doctor will decide your dose depending on the condition you are being treated for.
Continue taking Apikacin 500mg Injection in the dose and duration prescribed by the doctor to get maximum benefit.
Do not alter the dose of the medicine on your own, consult your doctor first.
Apikacin 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Apikacin 500mg Injection administered?
Apikacin 500mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the maximum benefit from Apikacin 500mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, Apikacin 500mg Injection should be taken in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Apikacin 500mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
If you experience an increase in the severity of your symptoms during the treatment, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Apikacin 500mg Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children, and other people.
What if I don't get better after using Apikacin 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, consult your doctor if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
The doctor may modify the dose or suggest an alternative medicine.
=

Can the use of Apilysin Syrup Sugar Free cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Apilysin Syrup Sugar Free can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Apilysin Syrup Sugar Free cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apilysin Syrup Sugar Free can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Apilysin Syrup Sugar Free?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is A Pine 100mg Tablet used for?
A Pine 100mg Tablet is a medicine used to treat depression.
It restores the balance of certain chemicals (neurotransmitters) in the brain that are responsible for depression along with anxiety or agitation.
This helps to elevate the mood and enhances the behavior by creating a feeling of well being.
What are the side effects of A Pine 100mg Tablet?
The common side effects of A Pine 100mg Tablet are an increased heart rate, orthostatic hypotension (sudden decrease in blood pressure on standing), dryness in mouth, abnormality of voluntary movements, weight gain, difficulty in urination and constipation.
Please consult your doctor if any of these side effects worry you.
The doctor will suggest ways to manage or prevent them.
I feel better now, can I stop taking A Pine 100mg Tablet?
No, you should not stop taking A Pine 100mg Tablet without discussing it with your doctor even if you feel better.
This is because if you stop taking it suddenly, your depression may come back and your symptoms may worsen.
Your doctor will decide for how long you need to continue this medicine.
Consult your doctor if any of the side effects bother you.
If you have completed your course of treatment, your doctor may decrease your dose gradually before taking you off this medicine.
Is there anything I need to be careful about while on therapy with A Pine 100mg Tablet?
A Pine 100mg Tablet may cause drowsiness and dizziness, especially in the beginning of the treatment.
Do not drive or work with tools or machinery if your alertness is affected.
It is not advisable to drink alcohol during treatment with this medicine as it might worsen the drowsiness.
Let your doctor know if you have any problems with your liver or kidneys and if you are on any medicines or supplements.
This is because medicines may have interactions with each other and cause allergic reactions that can sometimes be serious.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant, planning to conceive or breastfeeding to prevent any harmful effects on the baby.
Does A Pine 100mg Tablet cause any effect on pregnancy or the newborn?
Do not take A Pine 100mg Tablet during pregnancy unless prescribed by the doctor.
If you take this medicine during the last trimester of the pregnancy, the newborn may develop symptoms such as irritability or loud crying, rigidity (stiffness of limbs), irregular body movements, irregular breathing, poor feeding, difficulty in urinating or passing stools.
=

Can I cut the tablet of Apiquis 2.5 Tablet?
If you have difficulty swallowing the whole tablet, the tablet may be crushed and mixed with water, or 5% dextrose in water, or apple juice or apple puree.
Remember to crush the medicine just before you take it.
What if I miss a dose of Apiquis 2.5 Tablet?
If a dose is missed, the patient should take Apiquis 2.5 Tablet immediately and then continue with twice daily intake as before.
What are the side effects of taking Apiquis 2.5 Tablet?
Apiquis 2.5 Tablet may cause bleeding in eyes, stomach, nose, etc and anemia which may cause tiredness or paleness.
It may also lower your blood pressure which may make you faint or have a quickened heartbeat and nausea.
Blood tests may show an increase in gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), which may be due to liver problems.
What is Apiquis 2.5 Tablet used for?
Apiquis 2.5 Tablet is used to reduce the risk of stroke and blood clots in people who have atrial fibrillation.
In atrial fibrillation, the heart beats irregularly, increasing the chance of clots forming in the body and possibly causing strokes.
Apiquis 2.5 Tablet also helps to reduce the risk of forming a blood clot in the legs and lungs of people who have just had hip or knee replacement surgery and treat blood clots in the veins of your legs (deep vein thrombosis) or lungs (pulmonary embolism), and reduce the risk of them occurring again.
How dangerous is Apiquis 2.5 Tablet?
While using Apiquis 2.5 Tablet you should be aware of the risks involved such as it can cause excessive bleeding being a blood thinner.
Hence, do not stop taking the medication without speaking to your doctor.
If you have epidural or spinal anesthesia or a spinal puncture while taking Apiquis 2.5 Tablet then you may be at risk of developing a blood clot in or around your spine which can result in paralysis in some patients.
Hence, inform the doctor beforehand if you have had any such procedure.
Do I need to stop Apiquis 2.5 Tablet before surgery?
Consult your doctor who will tell you whether you have to stop it or not.
It will depend on the type of procedure involved.
For instance, if there is moderate to high risk of bleeding during the procedure you will have to stop taking Apiquis 2.5 Tablet 48 hours before surgery.
Is Apiquis 2.5 Tablet a blood thinner?
Yes, Apiquis 2.5 Tablet belongs to a class of medicines known as anticoagulant or blood thinner.
It prevents your blood from clotting by preventing formation of an important component of blood clotting (factor Xa).
=

Is Apitrax 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Apitrax 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Apitrax 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apitrax 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Apitrax 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Apitrax 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Apitrax 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Apitrax 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Apitrax 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Apitrax 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apitrax 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Apitrax 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Apitrax 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
=

Can I cut the tablet of Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet?
If you have difficulty swallowing the whole tablet, the tablet may be crushed and mixed with water, or 5% dextrose in water, or apple juice or apple puree.
Remember to crush the medicine just before you take it.
What if I miss a dose of Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet?
If a dose is missed, the patient should take Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet immediately and then continue with twice daily intake as before.
What are the side effects of taking Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet?
Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet may cause bleeding in eyes, stomach, nose, etc and anemia which may cause tiredness or paleness.
It may also lower your blood pressure which may make you faint or have a quickened heartbeat and nausea.
Blood tests may show an increase in gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), which may be due to liver problems.
What is Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet used for?
Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet is used to reduce the risk of stroke and blood clots in people who have atrial fibrillation.
In atrial fibrillation, the heart beats irregularly, increasing the chance of clots forming in the body and possibly causing strokes.
Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet also helps to reduce the risk of forming a blood clot in the legs and lungs of people who have just had hip or knee replacement surgery and treat blood clots in the veins of your legs (deep vein thrombosis) or lungs (pulmonary embolism), and reduce the risk of them occurring again.
How dangerous is Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet?
While using Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet you should be aware of the risks involved such as it can cause excessive bleeding being a blood thinner.
Hence, do not stop taking the medication without speaking to your doctor.
If you have epidural or spinal anesthesia or a spinal puncture while taking Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet then you may be at risk of developing a blood clot in or around your spine which can result in paralysis in some patients.
Hence, inform the doctor beforehand if you have had any such procedure.
Do I need to stop Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet before surgery?
Consult your doctor who will tell you whether you have to stop it or not.
It will depend on the type of procedure involved.
For instance, if there is moderate to high risk of bleeding during the procedure you will have to stop taking Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet 48 hours before surgery.
Is Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet a blood thinner?
Yes, Apixapil 2.5mg Tablet belongs to a class of medicines known as anticoagulant or blood thinner.
It prevents your blood from clotting by preventing formation of an important component of blood clotting (factor Xa).
=

Is Apiz 15mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Apiz 15mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Apiz 15mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Apiz 15mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Apiz 15mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Apiz 15mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Apiz 15mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Apiz 15mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Apiz 15mg Tablet?
Apiz 15mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Apiz 15mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Apiz 15mg Tablet?
Apiz 15mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
=

What is Apkocid 40mg Tablet used for?
Apkocid 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Apkocid 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Apkocid 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Apkocid 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Apkocid 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Apkocid 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Apkocid 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Apkocid 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Apkocid 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Apkocid 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Apkocid 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Apkocid 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Apkocid 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Apkocid 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Apkocid 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Apkocid 40mg Tablet?
=

Is Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD a sleeping pill?
Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD belongs to a class of medicines called benzodiazepines and is used to treat anxiety, stop seizures (fits) or relax tense muscles.
This can also help relieve difficulty sleeping (insomnia), and is usually prescribed for a short period of time, if used to treat sleeping problems.
You should take it in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Does Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD cause sleepiness? If yes, then should I stop driving while taking Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD?
Yes, Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD causes drowsiness very commonly.
It also causes forgetfulness and affects muscular function which may adversely affect your ability to drive.
Sometimes, drowsiness persists even on the following day.
So, in case Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD makes you sleepy and affects your alertness, you should avoid driving.
For how long should I take Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD?
The duration of treatment with Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD is mainly as short as possible.
Your doctor will evaluate you after 4 weeks of treatment in order to assess the need for continuation of treatment, especially if you do not have any symptoms.
Before taking you off this medicine, your doctor may gradually decrease your dose to prevent any withdrawal side effects.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get the most benefit.
Is it safe to take Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD and alcohol together?
No, it is not at all recommended to take alcohol with Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD since it can cause breathing problems, sleepiness and heart problems.
Taking Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD with alcohol may make you sleepy and your breathing may become so shallow that you may not wake up.
This may even lead to death.
Is Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD addictive?
People taking Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD in high doses or for a long term may become addicted to it.
Also, people with a history of alcoholism and drug abuse are more likely to become addicted to Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD.
Therefore, Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD should be taken for the shortest possible time and in the lowest effective dose.
Can I stop taking Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD if I start feeling better?
No, do not stop taking Aplaz 0.25mg Tablet MD suddenly as you may experience withdrawal effects like depression, nervousness, difficulty in sleeping, irritability, sweating, upset stomach or diarrhea.
Stopping it suddenly may even bring back the symptoms and make them harder to treat.
You may also experience mood changes, anxiety, restlessness and changes in sleep patterns.
These effects may occur even after taking low doses for a short period of time.
=

What is Aplet 75mg Tablet used for?
Aplet 75mg Tablet is used to prevent formation of blood clots, thus reducing the risk of heart attacks or stroke.
It facilitates smooth circulation of blood in the body by reducing the ability of the platelets to stick together, that could otherwise lead to formation of harmful clots in hardened blood vessels.
Is Aplet 75mg Tablet a blood thinner?
Yes, Aplet 75mg Tablet is an antiplatelet medicine which is also known as a blood thinner.
It makes your blood flow more easily through your blood vessels and prevents formation of harmful blood clots.
This lowers your chances of heart attack or stroke.
When should you take Aplet 75mg Tablet?
You should take Aplet 75mg Tablet exactly as prescribed by the doctor.
You can take it with or without food, at any time of the day.
However, it is important to take it regularly at the same time each day for best results.
This will also help you to remember to take it daily.
Does Aplet 75mg Tablet affect blood pressure?
Yes, Aplet 75mg Tablet may rarely cause a decrease in blood pressure as a side effect.
However, this is very rare and does not affect everyone.
Consult your doctor if you feel dizzy, lightheaded, weak or have a blurred vision.
These are signs and symptoms of low blood pressure and therefore, you should contact your doctor immediately.
Who should not take Aplet 75mg Tablet?
Aplet 75mg Tablet is not recommended for people who are allergic to it, have severe liver disease, have stomach ulcers, bleeding in the brain, or have a bleeding disorder known as hemophilia (disease in which blood does not clot normally).
Can I take alcohol with Aplet 75mg Tablet?
Yes, you can take alcohol with Aplet 75mg Tablet.
However, excessive intake of alcohol should be avoided as it can irritate the inner lining of the stomach and this increases the risk of developing a stomach ulcer later.
=

Can the use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of AP Lex T 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What lifestyle changes should be made while using Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
Are there any special instructions regarding the storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients who are allergic to amlodipine, atenolol or any of its ingredients.
It should be avoided in patients with history of asthma or lung disease.
Also, inform your doctor about your medical history and the medicines you might be taking.
Can the use of Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet cause headache?
Yes, the use of Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can cause headaches at the beginning of the treatment.
Headaches usually go away after the first week of the treatment.
Contact your doctor if the headaches are frequent and do not go away.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Aplomin AT 5mg/50mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
=

Can I stop taking Aploxim-O Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aploxim-O Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Aploxim-O Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Aploxim-O Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aploxim-O Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Aploxim-O Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Does the use of Aploxim-O Tablet help treat Urinary tract infections (UTIs)?
The use of Aploxim-O Tablet is advised in the treatment of Urinary tract infections (UTIs).
=

What is Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Apnaid P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Apocef 200 LB Tablet as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
How long does Apocef 200 LB Tablet take to work?
Usually, Apocef 200 LB Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Apocef 200 LB Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Apocef 200 LB Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apocef 200 LB Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

Is Apodon 200mg Tablet safe to use?
Apodon 200mg Tablet is safe to use at the prescribed dose for prescribed duration as advised by the doctor.
Patients should follow the advice of the doctor regarding its use.
Can the use of Apodon 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Apodon 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Apodon 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Is Apodon 200mg Tablet an antibiotic?
Yes, Apodon 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic, it belongs to a group of antibiotics known as cephalosporins.
Can Apodon 200mg Tablet cause constipation?
Yes, Apodon 200mg Tablet may cause constipation as a side effect.
However, taking mild laxatives may provide relief if you feel constipated.
Also, take a fiber-rich diet including fresh fruits, vegetables, whole wheat grains and avoid taking oily and spicy food as it will only worsen your condition.
If your constipation gets worse, please consult your doctor.
Can I stop taking Apodon 200mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved or when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Apodon 200mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You may start feeling better before the infection is completely cured.
But, it is important to take this medicine for the full duration advised by the doctor.
How long does Apodon 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Apodon 200mg Tablet starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Apofec SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Apofec SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Apofec SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Apofec SP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Apofec SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Apofec SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Apofec SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Apofec SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Is Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray a good painkiller?
Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used for various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray a narcotic?
No, Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray is not a narcotic.
It belongs to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) group of medicines.
Does Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray get you high?
No, Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray damage your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray may cause renal problems such as protein or blood in urine and painful urination.
Patients who are at maximum risk of developing kidney problems include people who are dehydrated, have heart failure, impaired kidney function, hypertension, elderly, who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Hence, for such patients kidney function monitoring is recommended.
Does Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray make you drowsy?
Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
What is the most important information I need to know about Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray?
It is important to know that Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray may increase your chance of having a heart attack or stroke.
The risk is more if you take higher doses and have been using the medicine for a longer time.
Also, taking Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray may cause ulcers, bleeding, or holes in your stomach and intestine.
These problems may happen without warning symptoms at any time during treatment and may even cause death.
Therefore, if you encounter any such problems, consult your doctor immediately.
Can Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray be taken during pregnancy?
You should not take Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray during the last 3 months of pregnancy as it may cause harmful effects on your baby.
Use of Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray can also lead to reduced labor (premature delivery).
Hence, it is advised to avoid using Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray during the first 6 months of pregnancy also.
In some cases, Apollo Pharmacy Pain Relief Spray may be prescribed in pregnant women only if the benefits outweigh the risks involved with its use in pregnant women.
If not sure, consult your doctor regarding its use.
=

Should Aposart 40 Tablet be taken in the morning or at night?
Aposart 40 Tablet is generally recommended to be taken once daily, either in the morning or in the evening.
Consider taking it at the same time each day as it will help you to remember taking it.
How long does it take for Aposart 40 Tablet to work?
You may see an improvement within a few days.
But, the maximum benefit can be seen within 4-8 weeks of starting treatment.
My blood pressure is now controlled.
Can I stop taking Aposart 40 Tablet now?
No, do not stop taking Aposart 40 Tablet without consulting your doctor even if your blood pressure is controlled.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your blood pressure which could be detrimental for you.
Aposart 40 Tablet does not cure high blood pressure but controls it.
So, you may have to take the medicine lifelong.
Talk to your doctor if you have any concerns.
If I have some kidney problem, can I take Aposart 40 Tablet? Can it further deteriorate my kidney function?
You can take Aposart 40 Tablet if it has been advised by your doctor.
Your doctor may ask you to get regular tests done (potassium and creatinine levels) in order to monitor your kidney function.
Aposart 40 Tablet may cause worsening of kidney function, therefore you should contact your doctor in case you notice swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands or unexplained weight gain.
I am overweight and the doctor has prescribed me Aposart 40 Tablet for blood pressure control.
I am bothered that Aposart 40 Tablet can increase my weight.
No, do not worry since Aposart 40 Tablet is not known to cause weight gain.
In fact in animal studies Aposart 40 Tablet has been found to decrease fat tissue.
Does Aposart 40 Tablet affect blood glucose levels in diabetics?
Aposart 40 Tablet may lower blood glucose levels in patients with diabetes.
Therefore, it is essential to keep a regular track of your blood glucose levels.
Talk to your doctor if you are a diabetic because the dose of insulin or antidiabetic medicines may need adjustment.
=

How long does Apoxime Tablet take to work?
The amount of time Apoxime Tablet takes to work depends on the type of infection and response of the patient to the medicine.
The antibiotic may start working after you take it but for maximum effect it may require some time.
Usually, the symptoms of bacterial infections start to decrease in 48 to 72 hours after starting the medication.
How long should you take Apoxime Tablet?
The duration of therapy with Apoxime Tablet depends upon the type of infection.
It is usually given for 7 days.
It ranges from 5 to 10 days and depends on the response of the infection in the patient.
Before starting the medication consult a doctor who will prescribe the exact duration of therapy and follow the instructions as given.
Can Apoxime Tablet be taken on an empty stomach?
No, Apoxime Tablet should not be taken on an empty stomach like other antibiotics of its class.
It should be taken twice daily after a meal.
Taking Apoxime Tablet with food increases the absorption rate of the drug.
This further enhances the effectiveness of the medicine to treat the infection.
Yes, Apoxime Tablet can be used to treat urinary tract infection (UTI).
But, it is prescribed only in cases of uncomplicated UTIs for 7 to 10 days.
The medication is to be prescribed by the doctor only, self-medication is not advised.
=

How long should I take Appecef 200mg Tablet?
Appecef 200mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
What if I do not get better after using Appecef 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
Can the use of Appecef 200mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Appecef 200mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
Appecef 200mg Tablet is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria, but it can also affect the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and cause diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
Appecef 200mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Appecef 200mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
What if I forget to take a dose of Appecef 200mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Appecef 200mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Appecef 200mg Tablet safe for the kidneys?
Yes, Appecef 200mg Tablet is safe for the kidneys when given alone, but when given along with aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin) or other cephalosporins antibiotics, it may increase kidney damage.
Therefore, it is advised to take this medicine only if prescribed by your doctor.
How long should I take Appecef 200mg Tablet?
Appecef 200mg Tablet is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Can the use of Appeliv Syrup cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Appeliv Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Appeliv Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Appeliv Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Appeliv Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can the use of Appiforte Syrup cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Appiforte Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Appiforte Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Appiforte Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Appiforte Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can the use of Appinext Syrup cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Appinext Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Appinext Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Appinext Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Appinext Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Can the use of App.UP Plus Syrup cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of App.UP Plus Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of App.UP Plus Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of App.UP Plus Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for App.UP Plus Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Apraize 20 Tablet an immunosuppressant?
No, Apraize 20 Tablet is not an immunosuppressant.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors (PDE4) which work by blocking the activity of PDE4.
PDE4 is found in inflammatory cells and blocking it helps in reducing the molecules responsible for inflammation.
How long does it take for Apraize 20 Tablet to work?
Apraize 20 Tablet is used to treat plaque psoriasis (red, scaly, thick, itchy, painful patches on skin) and psoriatic arthritis (a condition that causes joint pain and swelling).
It is a long-term treatment and may take about 16 weeks to show an improvement.
Can Apraize 20 Tablet cause depression?
Yes, Apraize 20 Tablet may cause depression as a side effect.
The patient may also develop suicidal thoughts.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of depression.
In case you develop any of these symptoms, consult your doctor immediately or ask your friends or relatives to help seek medical advice.
Does Apraize 20 Tablet cause weight reduction?
Yes, Apraize 20 Tablet may cause a decrease in appetite which may further cause weight loss.
You should monitor your weight regularly while on treatment with Apraize 20 Tablet.
In case of significant weight loss, consult your doctor and consider stopping Apraize 20 Tablet.
How should Apraize 20 Tablet be taken?
Be sure to take Apraize 20 Tablet exactly as directed by your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe a low dose initially.
This dose will be increased gradually after 6 days.
Swallow the tablets whole with water.
You can take it with or without food.
Can I take rifampicin along with Apraize 20 Tablet?
You should not take rifampicin if you are taking Apraize 20 Tablet.
Rifampicin interferes with the working of Apraize 20 Tablet by decreasing its levels, making it less effective.
As a result, you may not see any improvement after taking Apraize 20 Tablet.
What if I get pregnant during treatment with Apraize 20 Tablet?
In case you get pregnant while taking Apraize 20 Tablet, you should inform your doctor immediately.
In fact, pregnancy should be avoided during treatment with this medicine.
The reason being, according to animal studies, with Apraize 20 Tablet there may be a risk of baby loss or defects in unborn baby.
=

Is Apred Drop an anti-inflammatory drug?
Apred Drop belongs to the class of corticosteroids which has anti-inflammatory properties.
It works by suppressing the inflammation associated with many diseases, for example, arthritis.
Therefore, Apred Drop is used for the treatment of a number of inflammatory and auto-immune conditions.
How long can I take Apred Drop for?
It is advisable to take Apred Drop for the duration prescribed by your doctor.
Do not stop the treatment suddenly or take for a longer period than recommended by your doctor.
No, Apred Drop does not contain penicillin.
Apred Drop belongs to a group of medicines called steroids.
All the medicines come with an expiry date mentioned on the pack.
You must check the expiry date before using any medicine.
No, Apred Drop is not a painkiller.
Apred Drop belongs to a group of medicines called steroids which are anti-inflammatory in nature.
The medicine can help in pain relief which is caused due to inflammation.
Apred Drop is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
=

What is Apresol Tablet and what is it used for?
Apresol Tablet belongs to a class of medicines known as potassium channel openers.
It helps in the removal of potassium from the walls of arteries.
This results in increased space in the arteries for the blood to flow easily, thereby reducing the workload of the heart to pump the blood.
It also improves the blood and oxygen supply to your heart muscle.
It is prescribed to patients with stable angina (heart-related chest pain) who cannot take other medicines (beta blockers, calcium channel antagonist) meant for the treatment of angina.
Can I stop taking Apresol Tablet?
No, you should not stop taking Apresol Tablet without consulting your doctor.
Suddenly stopping the medication may cause reoccurring of your anginal pain.
It would be better to consult your doctor if you are experiencing any side effects.
How long does it take Apresol Tablet to start working?
Apresol Tablet starts working after about an hour of taking the medicine.
However, full benefits may be seen only after 4 to 5 days.
Consult your doctor if you do not notice any significant improvement in your condition.
For how long do I need to continue Apresol Tablet?
Apresol Tablet is generally prescribed for a long term.
You may even need to take it for the rest of your life.
You should continue taking your medicine for as long as your doctor tells you.
However, if you experience any bothersome side effects, consult your doctor.
What if somebody accidentally takes an excess of Apresol Tablet?
Taking Apresol Tablet in excess may cause low blood pressure and the person may feel weak or dizzy.
Also, one may experience irregular or fast heartbeat.
In case of an overdose, immediately consult the doctor and seek emergency medical help.
Can I take Apresol Tablet if I am taking aspirin?
You should avoid taking Apresol Tablet and aspirin together.
Taking these two medicines together increases the risk of ulcer or bleeding in the mouth, stomach or intestine.
Immediately consult your doctor, if you notice blood in your stool or vomit while using Apresol Tablet.
=

Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR is a combination of three medicines: Glimepiride, Metformin and Voglibose.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves the blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
Voglibose is an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor which lowers the postprandial (after meals) glucose levels in the body.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of Type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR?
The use of Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), nausea, diarrhea, altered taste, flatulence, stomach pain, headache, skin rash and respiratory tract infection.
Are there any specific conditions in which Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR should not be taken?
The use of Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR should be avoided in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine is also avoided in patients with moderate to severe kidney disease and in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, colonic ulcerations and underlying metabolic acidosis including diabetic ketoacidosis.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR?
No, it is not safe to take Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR along with alcohol.
It may lower your low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) and can increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
Can the use of Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Apriglave-MV3 Tablet SR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate, and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of blood sugar level is important.
Always keep glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR and consult your doctor immediately.
Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR?
The use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR?
No, it is not safe to take Apriglim-M1 Tablet PR along with alcohol, as it may lower your blood sugar levels and lead to hypoglycemia.
It can also increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
=

What are the recommended storage conditions for Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR lead to lactic acidosis?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR can lead to lactic acidosis.
It is a medical emergency which is caused by increased levels of lactic acid in the blood.
It is also known as MALA (Metformin-associated lactic acidosis).
It is a rare side effect associated with the use of metformin and therefore, it is considered to be harmful for patients with underlying kidney disease, old age patients or who take large amounts of alcohol.
Symptoms of lactic acidosis may include muscle pain or weakness, dizziness, tiredness, feeling of cold in arms and legs, difficulty in breathing, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or slow heart rate.
If you have these symptoms, stop taking Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR and consult your doctor immediately.
What is Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR?
Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR is a combination of two medicines: Glimepiride and Metformin.
This medicine is used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
It improves blood glucose levels in adults when taken along with proper diet and regular exercise.
Glimepiride lowers the blood glucose levels by increasing the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Metformin works by lowering the glucose production in the liver and improving insulin sensitivity.
This combination is not indicated for the treatment of type 1 DM.
What are the possible side effects of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR?
The use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR is associated with common side effects like hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level), altered taste, nausea, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache and upper respiratory tract infection.
Its use can also lead to serious but rare side effects like lactic acidosis.
On long-term use it can also lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency.
Can the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR lead to Vitamin B12 deficiency?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR can cause Vitamin B12 deficiency on long-term use.
It interferes with the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the stomach.
If untreated, it may cause anemia and nerve problems and the patient can experience tingling sensation and numbness in hands and feet, weakness, urinary problems, change in mental status and difficulty in maintaining balance (ataxia).
To avoid such problems, some researchers suggest an intake of Vitamin B12 from outside sources at least once every year.
Can the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR cause hypoglycemia?
Yes, the use of Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR can cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level).
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nausea, headache, irritability, hunger, sweating, dizziness, fast heart rate and feeling anxious or shaky.
It happens more often if you miss or delay your food, drink alcohol, over-exercise or take other antidiabetic medicine along with it.
So, regular monitoring of the blood sugar level is important.
Always keep a quick source of sugar like glucose tablets, honey or fruit juice with you.
Is it safe to take alcohol while I am also taking Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR?
No, it is not safe to take Apriglim-MF 2 Tablet PR along with alcohol, as it may lower your blood sugar levels and lead to hypoglycemia.
It can also increase the chances of lactic acidosis.
=

What is Aprilia 40mg Injection used for?
Aprilia 40mg Injection is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Aprilia 40mg Injection prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Can I take antacids along with Aprilia 40mg Injection?
Yes, you can take antacids along with Aprilia 40mg Injection.
Take it 2 hours before or after you take Aprilia 40mg Injection.
How long does it take for Aprilia 40mg Injection to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Aprilia 40mg Injection to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Does Aprilia 40mg Injection cause weight gain?
Although rare but long-term treatment with Aprilia 40mg Injection may cause weight gain.
The reason could be the relief from reflux symptoms which could make you eat more.
Consult your doctor for any weight-related concern.
Can I take alcohol with Aprilia 40mg Injection?
No, alcohol intake is not advised with Aprilia 40mg Injection.
Alcohol itself does not affect the working of Aprilia 40mg Injection, but it can increase the acid production.
This may further cause worsening of your symptoms.
What dietary changes should I make to get relief from acidity?
Aprilia 40mg Injection is best taken 1 hour before a meal.
You should avoid spicy and fatty foods while taking this medicine.
You must refrain from caffeinated drinks such as tea, coffee and cola.
Alcohol intake should also be avoided as it may worsen your symptoms.
=

Does Apriset 150mg Injection help treat nausea and vomiting?
No, this medicine will not treat nausea or vomiting that has already started.
Apriset 150mg Injection is used with other medications to help prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer drug treatment (chemotherapy).
It prevents the feeling of sickness by blocking the body's natural substances that cause nausea and vomiting.
What are some of the serious side-effects of Apriset 150mg Injection?
Some of the serious side-effects of this medicine are rash, itching, skin peeling or blisters, difficulty breathing or swallowing.
Does Apriset 150mg Injection reduce the effectiveness of contraceptives?
This medicine can make hormonal birth control less effective, including birth control pills, injections, implants, skin patches, and vaginal rings.
To prevent pregnancy while using Apriset 150mg Injection, use a barrier form of birth control like condom, diaphragm, or cervical cap.
Keep using the barrier form of birth control for 1 month after your last dose of aprepitant.
Is Apriset 150mg Injection given before or after chemotherapy?
Apriset 150mg Injection is administered 1 hour before your chemotherapy on days 1, 2, and 3 of your treatment.
Should I avoid any food and drinks while taking Apriset 150mg Injection?
You can continue with your normal diet unless your doctor tells you otherwise.
However, it is advisable to sip water regularly to prevent you from becoming dehydrated, eating small, simple but nourishing snacks every few hours rather than large meals, and sucking on hard candy or popsicles during chemotherapy to prevent nausea and vomiting.
What should I avoid during chemotherapy?
During chemotherapy, it is advisable to avoid caffeine as it can make you feel dehydrated, avoid fatty fried, spicy, and overly sweet foods, as they may induce nausea, avoid alcohol and smoking.
It is also advisable to avoid crowds or people with colds, as you may be at risk of infection as well as sun exposure to prevent rashes and dry skin.
=

What Aprogen 14mg Injection is and what it is used for?
Aprogen 14mg Injection belongs to a group of medicines called antifibrinolytics, i.e.
How is Aprogen 14mg Injection given?
This injection will usually be given to you lying down by slow injection or infusion (through ‘a drip’) through a catheter into a larger vein in your body.
Can Aprogen 14mg Injection be given to children?
This injection should be avoided in children since its safety and efficacy in children below the age of 18 years have not been established.
Consult your doctor for more advice.
What other medications should be avoided while taking Aprogen 14mg Injection?
It is advisable to avoid taking any other anti-fibrinolytic and antibiotics while taking Aprogen 14mg Injection.
Inform your doctor before the start of the treatment if you are taking any of these.
What are some of the serious side-effects of Aprogen 14mg Injection?
Some of the serious side-effects of this medicine are blood clots in the lungs, severe blood clotting disorder that results in tissue damage and bleeding, the inability of the blood to clot or coagulate normally, chest pain, and severe allergic shock (anaphylactic shock), which is potentially life-threatening.
In such cases, your doctor will stop the treatment completely.
=

What Aprostat 500000IU Injection is and what it is used for?
Aprostat 500000IU Injection belongs to a group of medicines called antifibrinolytics, i.e.
How is Aprostat 500000IU Injection given?
This injection will usually be given to you lying down by slow injection or infusion (through ‘a drip’) through a catheter into a larger vein in your body.
Can Aprostat 500000IU Injection be given to children?
This injection should be avoided in children since its safety and efficacy in children below the age of 18 years have not been established.
Consult your doctor for more advice.
What other medications should be avoided while taking Aprostat 500000IU Injection?
It is advisable to avoid taking any other anti-fibrinolytic and antibiotics while taking Aprostat 500000IU Injection.
Inform your doctor before the start of the treatment if you are taking any of these.
What are some of the serious side-effects of Aprostat 500000IU Injection?
Some of the serious side-effects of this medicine are blood clots in the lungs, severe blood clotting disorder that results in tissue damage and bleeding, the inability of the blood to clot or coagulate normally, chest pain, and severe allergic shock (anaphylactic shock), which is potentially life-threatening.
In such cases, your doctor will stop the treatment completely.
=

No, Aprovent Inhaler is not a steroid.
No, Aprovent Inhaler is not a narcotic.
It does not contain opium or its derivative.
Does Aprovent Inhaler cause weight gain?
Aprovent Inhaler has no known effects on weight gain.
Yes, constipation is a known side effect of Aprovent Inhaler.
Does Aprovent Inhaler cause tachycardia (increased heart rate)?
Aprovent Inhaler may sometimes cause tachycardia (increased heart rate) in some patients.
It is not a common side effect of Aprovent Inhaler.
Does Aprovent Inhaler cause an increase in blood pressure?
Aprovent Inhaler has no known effects on blood pressure.
Is ipratropium bromide the same as albuterol?
Ipratropium bromide and albuterol are 2 different medicines.
They relax the air passages and make breathing easier (bronchodilators).
Is ipratropium bromide the same as budesonide?
=

What should I avoid while taking Aprylx H Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Aprylx H Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Aprylx H Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any such symptoms, contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Aprylx H Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Remember, Aprylx H Tablet does not cure your hypertension (high blood pressure) but helps normalize it.
You should continue taking this medicine even if your blood pressure is controlled.
If you stop taking Aprylx H Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Generally, blood pressure-lowering medicines are to be taken for the rest of your life.
It is important to know that by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Aprylx H Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure, consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Aprylx H Tablet?
You should not stop taking Aprylx H Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Aprylx H Tablet for a long time?
Aprylx H Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Aprylx H Tablet for?
You may have to take Aprylx H Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
What if Aprylx H Tablet doesn’t make me feel any better?
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take APSP 15 Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking APSP 15 Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can APSP 15 Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can APSP 15 Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking APSP 15 Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take APSP 15 Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of APSP 15 Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of APSP 15 Tablet than recommended?
=

Aptacef 500mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How long does Aptacef 500mg Injection take to work?
Usually, Aptacef 500mg Injection starts working soon after you take it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and relieve your symptoms completely.
Who should not take Aptacef 500mg Injection?
Aptacef 500mg Injection should not be prescribed to people who are allergic to Aptacef 500mg Injection or any of its ingredients.
Inform your doctor if you have or ever had any problems with your liver, kidneys, gall bladder, or any other blood-related disorders such as hemolytic anemia.
If you are pregnant, breastfeeding or if you are planning a baby, do not take Aptacef 500mg Injection without consulting your doctor to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
Let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
What if I do not get better after using Aptacef 500mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you do not feel better even after finishing the full course of treatment.
You must also inform your doctor if the symptoms get worse while using this medicine.
For how long does Aptacef 500mg Injection stay in the body?
Usually, Aptacef 500mg Injection stays in the body for around 2 days after completely stopping the medicine.
Aptacef 500mg Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aptacef 500mg Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

What should I avoid while taking Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any such symptoms, contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Remember, Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet does not cure your hypertension (high blood pressure) but helps normalize it.
You should continue taking this medicine even if your blood pressure is controlled.
If you stop taking Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Generally, blood pressure-lowering medicines are to be taken for the rest of your life.
It is important to know that by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure, consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long time?
Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for?
You may have to take Aptan HZ 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
=

What should I avoid while taking Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any such symptoms, contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Remember, Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet does not cure your hypertension (high blood pressure) but helps normalize it.
You should continue taking this medicine even if your blood pressure is controlled.
If you stop taking Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Generally, blood pressure-lowering medicines are to be taken for the rest of your life.
It is important to know that by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure, consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long time?
Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
How long will I be taking Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for?
You may have to take Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long-term or even lifelong.
The medicine only keeps your blood pressure under control for as long as you are taking it.
Therefore, it is advised to continue your medication and follow your doctor's advice.
What if Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet doesn’t make me feel any better?
High blood pressure does not usually have any symptoms, so you may not feel ill if there is any change in the blood pressure.
Therefore, this medicine may not make you feel “better”.
This does not mean that you can stop the medicine as they are working in the background to reduce your risk of serious illness.
Can Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet affect my fertility or sex life?
Aptel H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet may very rarely lead to erectile dysfunction (inability to gain or maintain an erection).
Consult your doctor if you are worried or notice some changes.
However, untreated hypertension (high blood pressure) itself can lead to erectile dysfunction, therefore it is important that you take your medicine regularly and keep a track of your blood pressure.
=

How long should you use Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash?
The duration of use of Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash will depend on the condition it is being prescribed for.
If you are using it for gum disease (gingivitis) it may be used for a month.
If being used for mouth ulcers and thrush, this mouthwash may be used till 2 days after the symptoms are relieved.
Does Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash stain teeth?
Yes, though it does not occur in everyone, Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash may stain your teeth and tongue.
Staining is not permanent and may disappear after discontinuation of treatment.
Brushing the teeth with regular toothpaste before using Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash can prevent staining.
You should also avoid tannin-containing food and drinks such as tea and coffee.
Does Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash help bad breath?
Yes, Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash is effective in reducing bad breath, which persists for about 3 hours.
However, the risk of staining teeth and alteration of taste should be borne in mind before you start using it.
How should Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash be used?
It should be used as required.
It is generally used twice daily.
Rinse the mouth thoroughly for about 1 minute with 10 ml of Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash mouthwash.
After rinsing, expel it from your mouth.
What precautions should be followed while using Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash?
Using toothpastes immediately after the mouthwash may interfere with the working of mouthwash properly.
Use it before the mouthwash or at a different time of the day.
Always rinse your mouth before using the mouthwash.
How long should you use Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash?
The duration of use of Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash will depend on the condition it is being prescribed for.
If you are using it for gum disease (gingivitis) it may be used for a month.
If being used for mouth ulcers and thrush, this mouthwash may be used till 2 days after the symptoms are relieved.
Does Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash stain teeth?
Yes, though it does not occur in everyone, Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash may stain your teeth and tongue.
Staining is not permanent and may disappear after discontinuation of treatment.
Brushing the teeth with regular toothpaste before using Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash can prevent staining.
You should also avoid tannin-containing food and drinks such as tea and coffee.
Does Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash help bad breath?
Yes, Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash is effective in reducing bad breath, which persists for about 3 hours.
However, the risk of staining teeth and alteration of taste should be borne in mind before you start using it.
How should Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash be used?
It should be used as required.
It is generally used twice daily.
Rinse the mouth thoroughly for about 1 minute with 10 ml of Aptifresh-MW Mouth Wash mouthwash.
After rinsing, expel it from your mouth.
=

Can the use of Aptital Syrup Sugar Free cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Aptital Syrup Sugar Free can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Aptital Syrup Sugar Free cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aptital Syrup Sugar Free can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Aptital Syrup Sugar Free?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aptonac-SP Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aptonac-SP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aptonac-SP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aptonac-SP Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aptonac-SP Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Aptonac-SP Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher dose of Aptonac-SP Tablet than recommended?
=

Is Apxenta 30mg Tablet an immunosuppressant?
No, Apxenta 30mg Tablet is not an immunosuppressant.
It belongs to a class of medicines known as phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors (PDE4) which work by blocking the activity of PDE4.
PDE4 is found in inflammatory cells and blocking it helps in reducing the molecules responsible for inflammation.
How long does it take for Apxenta 30mg Tablet to work?
Apxenta 30mg Tablet is used to treat plaque psoriasis (red, scaly, thick, itchy, painful patches on skin) and psoriatic arthritis (a condition that causes joint pain and swelling).
It is a long-term treatment and may take about 16 weeks to show an improvement.
Can Apxenta 30mg Tablet cause depression?
Yes, Apxenta 30mg Tablet may cause depression as a side effect.
The patient may also develop suicidal thoughts.
It should be avoided in patients with a history of depression.
In case you develop any of these symptoms, consult your doctor immediately or ask your friends or relatives to help seek medical advice.
Does Apxenta 30mg Tablet cause weight reduction?
Yes, Apxenta 30mg Tablet may cause a decrease in appetite which may further cause weight loss.
You should monitor your weight regularly while on treatment with Apxenta 30mg Tablet.
In case of significant weight loss, consult your doctor and consider stopping Apxenta 30mg Tablet.
How should Apxenta 30mg Tablet be taken?
Be sure to take Apxenta 30mg Tablet exactly as directed by your doctor.
Your doctor will prescribe a low dose initially.
This dose will be increased gradually after 6 days.
Swallow the tablets whole with water.
You can take it with or without food.
=

Can the use of Apyshot S Syrup cause dryness in mouth?
Yes, the use of Apyshot S Syrup can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can the use of Apyshot S Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Apyshot S Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
\What is the recommended storage condition for Apyshot S Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Apz 5mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Apz 5mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Apz 5mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Apz 5mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Apz 5mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Apz 5mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Apz 5mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Apz 5mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Apz 5mg Tablet?
Apz 5mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Apz 5mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Apz 5mg Tablet?
Apz 5mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Apz 5mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

What if I miss my dose?
Take Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet as soon you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
How long does Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet take to work?
Usually, Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aqcef LB 200mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
=

What is Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Aqnozone ASP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
=

Aqsusten 50 Injection contains progesterone, which is a natural female sex hormone.
It is used to treat menstrual and pregnancy-related issues that are caused due to hormonal imbalance.
It may also be prescribed along with estrogen as a part of hormonal replacement therapy for preventing endometrial hyperplasia (thickening of the lining of the uterus).
What is Aqsusten 50 Injection used to treat?
Aqsusten 50 Injection is used to treat various disorders.
It is given to women with secondary amenorrhea (no menstruation for 3 months in women who have had their menses before).
It is used to support pregnancy, prevent premature labor, and treat bleeding disorders that may occur before menopause.
It may be used as a part of fertility treatment and may be given as hormone replacement therapy after menopause.
It is also given to relieve symptoms of premenstrual syndrome and painful bleeding like in dysfunctional uterine bleeding.
How and in what dose should I take Aqsusten 50 Injection?
Aqsusten 50 Injection is to be given by a doctor or nurse only.
It is given as an injection into the muscle.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Aqsusten 50 Injection.
Does Aqsusten 50 Injection cause weight gain?
Yes, the use of Aqsusten 50 Injection may cause weight gain.
The reason for this weight gain could be water retention, however this may not be a serious sign.
If you are concerned about weight gain, contact your doctor.
How is Aqsusten 50 Injection beneficial for fertility and pregnancy?
Aqsusten 50 Injection consists of progesterone, which is important for fertility.
Progesterone is the hormone secreted by the ovaries that helps prepare the uterus for pregnancy and also maintain it.
Aqsusten 50 Injection is given in cases of infertility to support the uterus in preparing itself for the pregnancy and to prevent the abortions in some cases.
It is also used to prevent premature labor.
Aqsusten 50 Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aqsusten 50 Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

What is Aquacure 0.5% Eye Drop used for?
Aquacure 0.5% Eye Drop is a tear substitute.
It is used as a lubricant for dry eyes.
It is also used for the temporary relief of burning, irritation and/or discomfort due to dryness of eyes.
Moreover, it is used to lubricate and re-wet soft and rigid gas permeable contact lenses.
It is also indicated to relieve dryness, irritation, and discomfort that may be associated with lens wear.
What are the side effects of Aquacure 0.5% Eye Drop?
You may experience visual disturbances, eye discharge, and may notice medication residue while using this medicine.
Some other side effects of this medicine include redness of the eye, eye irritation, burning and discomfort, eyelid swelling and itching of the eye.
How should Aquacure 0.5% Eye Drop be stored?
Store at or below 25°C and out of the reach of children.
Do not touch the tip of the container to any surface and replace the cap after every use.
Remember not to use the eye drops after the expiry date or after 30 days of opening it.
How should Aquacure 0.5% Eye Drop be used?
If you are using it for dry eyes, instil 1 or 2 drops in the affected eye(s) as needed.
If you are using it to lubricate soft and rigid gas-permeable lenses, apply 1 to 2 drops to each eye with the lenses on as needed or as directed by your doctor.
Blink several times after pouring the drops.
=

Does Aquadol Tpm Gel work for back pain?
Aquadol Tpm Gel is a safe and effective option for treating joint pain, especially in cases of arthritis.
It can also be used to treat acute neck pain, back pain, tendonitis, and sprains and strains.
Can I use Aquadol Tpm Gel for osteoarthritis in the hip?
No, Aquadol Tpm Gel is not recommended for hip pain.
The hip joint is located deep in the body.
It is unlikely for this medication to be absorbed deep enough under the skin to help with joint pain in the hip.
How to use Aquadol Tpm Gel?
Gently rub Aquadol Tpm Gel into the skin using your hands.
You should apply it 4 times a day for best results.
You might get some relief quickly (within half an hour), but if often takes a few days of use for the full benefits.
Only apply to clean, dry skin that does not have any cuts, open wounds, infections, or rashes.
Consult your doctor in case of any doubts.
Wash your hands after applying the gel and if your hands are the treatment side, wait for at least an hour before washing your hands.
You should also keep the treated area out of direct sunlight or you might develop a skin reaction.
How long should I use Aquadol Tpm Gel?
Use this topical medicine for as long as prescribed by your doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I use any other moisturizer or sunscreen after applying Aquadol Tpm Gel?
Avoid using other topical products, such as lotions, and sunscreens, on the same area of skin where you apply Aquadol Tpm Gel.
These products might affect how your skin absorbs this medication.
Can I use a heating pad or put a bandage on the area after applying Aquadol Tpm Gel?
No, it is not advisable to use any heating pad or bandage on the area of application of this gel since it might increase the absorption of the medicine, causing unwanted effects.
=

What is Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop used for?
Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop is an artificial substitute for tears.
It is used as a lubricant for dry eyes.
It is also used for the temporary relief of burning, irritation and/or discomfort due to dryness of eyes.
Moreover, it is used to lubricate and re-wet soft and rigid gas permeable contact lenses.
It is also indicated to relieve dryness, irritation and discomfort that may be associated with lens wear.
What are the side effects of Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop?
You may experience visual disturbances and eye discharge while using this medicine.
Some other side effects of this medicine include redness of the eye, eye irritation, burning and discomfort, eyelid swelling and itching of the eye.
If any of these side effects bother you, please consult your doctor.
How should Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop be stored?
Store at or below 25°C and out of the reach of children.
Do not touch the tip of the container to any surface or eye(s).
Replace the cap after every use.
Remember not to use the eye drops after the expiry date or after 30 days of opening it.
How should Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop be used?
If you are using it for dry eyes, instil 1 or 2 drops in the affected eye(s) as needed.
If you are using it to lubricate soft and rigid gas-permeable lenses, apply 1 to 2 drops to each eye with the lenses on as needed or as directed by your doctor.
Blink several times after pouring the drops.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
Is Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop bad?
No, Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop is a safe medicine.
It is meant for external use only and is not harmful.
However, in some patients, Aqua Gold 1% Eye Drop may cause eye irritation (burning and discomfort), eye pain, itchy eyes and visual disturbance.
Immediately contact your doctor if any of these effects perists.
=

What is Aquamet Nasal Spray used for?
Aquamet Nasal Spray is used to relieve symptoms that may occur with hay fever or other allergies, including stuffiness (congestion) in the nose, discharge, itching and sneezing.
What if I forget to use a dose of Aquamet Nasal Spray?
If you forget a dose of Aquamet Nasal Spray, use it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, use it in the regular schedule instead of taking the missed dose.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is Aquamet Nasal Spray an antifungal, an antibiotic or a steroid?
Aquamet Nasal Spray is neither an antifungal nor an antibiotic.
It is a corticosteroid which is used to reduce inflammation (redness, swelling) in various conditions.
Aquamet Nasal Spray is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop using it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aquamet Nasal Spray too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Aquamet Nasal Spray is effective for my child.
Can I extend the treatment a little longer?
You should use Aquamet Nasal Spray as advised by your doctor, especially in children.
Using more than the prescribed dose or even extending the duration of treatment may cause hormonal imbalance in your child.
As a result, the child may develop puffiness or rounding of face and there could be delay in growth and development.
Therefore, consult the doctor before trying any dose adjustments.
=


=

What should I avoid while taking Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should avoid potassium supplements or salt substitutes, unless advised by your doctor.
Also, avoid alcohol consumption as doing so can further lower your blood pressure and may cause some side effects.
In addition to that, avoid getting dehydrated, drink enough fluids during exercise and in hot weather.
The medicine may make you dizzy so avoid driving, using machinery or doing anything that needs concentration unless you know how this medicine affects you.
If you feel dizzy, lie down so you do not faint.
Then sit for a few moments before standing to prevent feeling dizzy again.
What happens if I take too much of Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you accidentally take too much of Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, you may experience symptoms such as low blood pressure, dizziness, lightheadedness, weakness, vomiting and rapid heartbeat.
However, in some cases slow heartbeat, reduced kidney function including kidney failure (e.g., reduced urine output) have also been reported.
If you experience any such symptoms, contact your doctor immediately and seek medical help.
Can I come off Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is under control or normal?
Remember, Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet does not cure your hypertension (high blood pressure) but helps normalize it.
You should continue taking this medicine even if your blood pressure is controlled.
If you stop taking Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Generally, blood pressure-lowering medicines are to be taken for the rest of your life.
It is important to know that by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What happens if I forget to take Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is close to the time of your next dose, skip the missed one and take the next scheduled dose.
Do not take a double dose to make up for the one you missed.
If you often forget doses, it may help to set an alarm to remind you.
If not sure, consult your doctor for other ways to help you remember.
What will happen if I stop taking Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet without talking to your doctor first.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, diarrhea etc., talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long time?
Aquasartan H 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is generally safe to take for a long time.
Remember to follow your doctor's advice/instructions.
=

What is Aquasurge Eye Drop used for?
Aquasurge Eye Drop is a tear substitute.
It is used as a lubricant for dry eyes.
It is also used for the temporary relief of burning, irritation and/or discomfort due to dryness of eyes.
Moreover, it is used to lubricate and re-wet soft and rigid gas permeable contact lenses.
It is also indicated to relieve dryness, irritation, and discomfort that may be associated with lens wear.
What are the side effects of Aquasurge Eye Drop?
You may experience visual disturbances, eye discharge, and may notice medication residue while using this medicine.
Some other side effects of this medicine include redness of the eye, eye irritation, burning and discomfort, eyelid swelling and itching of the eye.
How should Aquasurge Eye Drop be stored?
Store at or below 25°C and out of the reach of children.
Do not touch the tip of the container to any surface and replace the cap after every use.
Remember not to use the eye drops after the expiry date or after 30 days of opening it.
How should Aquasurge Eye Drop be used?
If you are using it for dry eyes, instil 1 or 2 drops in the affected eye(s) as needed.
If you are using it to lubricate soft and rigid gas-permeable lenses, apply 1 to 2 drops to each eye with the lenses on as needed or as directed by your doctor.
Blink several times after pouring the drops.
No, Aquasurge Eye Drop is a safe medicine.
It is meant for external use only and is not harmful.
In some patients, Aquasurge Eye Drop may cause eye irritation (burning and discomfort), eye pain, itchy eyes, visual disturbance.
Immediately contact your doctor if any of these effects perists.
=

What does Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR do to the brain?
Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR helps to correct chemical imbalances in the brain.
It acts on various chemical messengers in the brain like dopamine and serotonin.
It prevents the excessive activity of dopamine, helping to treat symptoms of schizophrenia and mania.
Is Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR a sleeping pill?
Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR can make you feel sleepy, but it is not used as a sleeping pill.
Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR is approved for the treatment of symptoms of schizophrenia.
It prevents as well as treats episodes of mania and depression in bipolar disorder.
It is also used with other medicines to treat depression.
How long does Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR take to work?
You may start seeing an improvement within a week of starting Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR but full benefits may take about 4-6 weeks to appear.
Is Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR good for anxiety?
Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR has not been approved for the treatment of anxiety; however, your doctor may prescribe it for anxiety.
Some studies suggest its use in post-traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and anxiety associated with mood disorders.
What should I avoid while taking Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR?
Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness.
So, do not drive, operate machinery or do anything dangerous until you know how Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR affects you.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Aquiti 100mg Tablet SR as it may worsen the drowsiness.
Avoid getting dehydrated or over-exposure to heat.
=

What is Arabe 20mg Tablet used for?
Arabe 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Arabe 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Arabe 20mg Tablet to work?
Arabe 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Arabe 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Arabe 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Arabe 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Arabe 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arabe 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Arabe 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Arabe 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Arabe 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
How is Arabe 20mg Tablet useful in the treatment of H.
=

Can the use of Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Araiper S 500mg/250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
=

What is Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections.
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
The use of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I stop taking Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Aramox CV 500mg/125mg Tablet before completing the full course of the treatment, even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, continue taking the medicine for the due course as the medicine may still be showing beneficial effects.
=

Does the use of Arazap 600mg Tablet affect weight?
Yes, Arazap 600mg Tablet affects weight and may cause weight gain.
However, in some cases, weight loss has also been reported.
Consult a dietician and follow a diet plan to maintain your weight.
What are the advantages of Arazap 600mg Tablet over carbamazepine?
Arazap 600mg Tablet has fewer side effects as compared to carbamazepine.
Moreover, Arazap 600mg Tablet can be started with a clinically effective dose as against carbamazepine which may require frequent visits to the doctor before an effective dose can be decided based on the patient’s response to the treatment.
How can I watch for early symptoms of suicidal thoughts and actions?
You should pay attention to any changes, especially sudden changes in mood, behaviour, thoughts or feelings.
Be aware of common warning signs that might be a signal for risk of suicide.
Some of these include talking or thinking about hurting yourself or ending your life, withdrawing from friends and family, becoming depressed or worsening your depression.
Keep your appointment with your doctor on schedule, do not miss.
Stay connected with the doctor even between visits.
When and how should I take Arazap 600mg Tablet?
Take Arazap 600mg Tablet exactly as directed by your doctor.
It is recommended that you take it twice every day, unless your doctor tells you otherwise.
Arazap 600mg Tablet can be taken with or without food.
Take your medicine at the same time each day to gain maximum benefit.
It will also help you remember when to take it.
For how long do I need to take Arazap 600mg Tablet.
Can I stop taking it on my own?
You should take your medicine for the time and duration prescribed by your doctor.
Arazap 600mg Tablet helps to control your epilepsy but does not cure it.
You must take this medicine every day, even if you feel well.
Do not stop taking Arazap 600mg Tablet or lower the dose yourself.
Stopping your medicine suddenly or lowering the dose may cause seizures.
Consult your doctor who may reduce the dose gradually before stopping it completely.
Will the use of Arazap 600mg Tablet affect my fertility?
Arazap 600mg Tablet is not know to affect fertility in males or females.
However, talk to your doctor if you are facing fertility issues while taking this medicine.
Does Arazap 600mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Arazap 600mg Tablet causes hair loss as a common side effect.
However, it does not affect everyone.
If there is substantial hair loss, consult your doctor.
=

What is Arbee 20mg Tablet used for?
Arbee 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Arbee 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Arbee 20mg Tablet to work?
Arbee 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Arbee 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Arbee 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Arbee 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Arbee 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arbee 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Arbee 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Arbee 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Arbee 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
=

What is Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines that helps keep the blood pressure under control.
The medicine works by reducing the risk of strokes and myocardial infarction (heart attack), thereby treating hypertension (high blood pressure).
Can the use of Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some people.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it would be best to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
The use of Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for people with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should preferably be avoided in people with severe kidney or liver impairment and in people with anuria (reduction or absence of urine).
Its use should also be avoided in women who are in the second and third trimesters of their pregnancy.
What is the recommended storage condition for Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Dispose the unused or expired medicine.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I come off Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet when my blood pressure is controlled?
Even if your blood pressure is successfully lowered by this medicine, it is advised to continue your medication.
If you stop taking Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet, your blood pressure could rise back up again.
Blood pressure lowering medicines only help to control your condition but do not cure it.
You will probably need to take them for the rest of your life.
Remember, by keeping your blood pressure controlled you are reducing your risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
What will happen if I stop taking Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet?
You should not stop taking Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet without consulting your doctor.
If you do stop taking it, your blood pressure may rise and you may put yourself at greater risk of having a heart attack or a stroke.
If you experience any persistent side effects, talk to your doctor.
Is it safe to take Arbicos CH 40mg/12.5mg Tablet for a long time?
=

Should Arbitel 80 Tablet be taken in the morning or at night?
Arbitel 80 Tablet is generally recommended to be taken once daily, either in the morning or in the evening.
Consider taking it at the same time each day as it will help you to remember taking it.
How long does it take for Arbitel 80 Tablet to work?
You may see an improvement within a few days.
But, the maximum benefit can be seen within 4-8 weeks of starting treatment.
My blood pressure is now controlled.
Can I stop taking Arbitel 80 Tablet now?
No, do not stop taking Arbitel 80 Tablet without consulting your doctor even if your blood pressure is controlled.
Stopping it suddenly may increase your blood pressure which could be detrimental for you.
Arbitel 80 Tablet does not cure high blood pressure but controls it.
So, you may have to take the medicine lifelong.
Talk to your doctor if you have any concerns.
If I have some kidney problem, can I take Arbitel 80 Tablet? Can it further deteriorate my kidney function?
You can take Arbitel 80 Tablet if it has been advised by your doctor.
Your doctor may ask you to get regular tests done (potassium and creatinine levels) in order to monitor your kidney function.
Arbitel 80 Tablet may cause worsening of kidney function, therefore you should contact your doctor in case you notice swelling in your feet, ankles, or hands or unexplained weight gain.
I am overweight and the doctor has prescribed me Arbitel 80 Tablet for blood pressure control.
I am bothered that Arbitel 80 Tablet can increase my weight.
No, do not worry since Arbitel 80 Tablet is not known to cause weight gain.
In fact in animal studies Arbitel 80 Tablet has been found to decrease fat tissue.
=

Can I stop taking Arbitel R 40 mg/5 mg Tablet if my blood pressure is under control?
No, you should keep taking Arbitel R 40 mg/5 mg Tablet for as long as your doctor has recommended you to take it.
You may need to take it lifelong.
Do not stop taking it, even if you feel well or your blood pressure is well controlled since your blood pressure may increase again and your condition may worsen.
Can I take other supplements for controlling my blood pressure along with Arbitel R 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
No, you should not take other supplements for controlling blood pressure along with this medicine.
Always consult your doctor before taking any other medicine, supplement, or herbals while you are on this medicine.
I am experiencing nausea after starting treatment with Arbitel R 40 mg/5 mg Tablet.
Nausea is one of the common side effects of this medicine.
If you feel really sick, consult your doctor who may reduce the dosage or discontinue the medicine based on the severity of your condition.
Do not stop taking the medicine without consulting your doctor.
Also, eat smaller, more frequent meals to reduce the feeling of nausea.
Avoid food that is salty, spicy, fried, or fatty.
What vitals do I need to monitor while taking Arbitel R 40 mg/5 mg Tablet?
Your doctor will advise you to monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing, and oxygen levels closely while taking this medicine.
I am having trouble remembering to take my medications.
Is there anything I can do to help me remember?
In order to avoid missing a dose, use a calendar, pillbox, alarm clock, or cell phone alert to help you remember to take your medication.
You may also ask a family member or a friend to remind you or check in with you to be sure you are taking your medication.
=

Are there any special instructions regarding storage and disposal of this medicine?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I feel dizzy after taking Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Yes, the use of Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet can make you feel dizzy.
This may occur when you suddenly rise up from lying or sitting position.
To lower the chance of feeling dizzy or passing out, rise slowly if you have been sitting or lying down.
Can I use Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
Its use can cause injury and death to the baby.
If you conceive while using Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet, stop using it and contact your doctor immediately.
Your doctor will recommend you other ways to lower the blood pressure.
What are some lifestyle changes to make while using Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet?
Making lifestyle changes can boost your health while taking Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet.
Avoid smoking, as smoking increases your risk of having heart attack and stroke.
If you are overweight or obese, try to lose weight.
You should maintain a healthy diet by including fruits and vegetables in your meals.
Regular exercise can make your heart strong and reduce the risk of heart attack.
Can I stop taking Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet if I feel well?
No, keep using Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet as advised by your doctor, even if you feel well.
Stopping Arblos-H 25mg/12.5mg Tablet suddenly may lead to serious complications such as heart attack and stroke.
=

What if I give too much of Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Arcefim 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
=

Is Arcil 200mg Tablet SR a good painkiller?
Arcil 200mg Tablet SR is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Is Arcil 200mg Tablet SR safe?
Arcil 200mg Tablet SR is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Arcil 200mg Tablet SR get you high?
No, Arcil 200mg Tablet SR does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Arcil 200mg Tablet SR hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Arcil 200mg Tablet SR may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Arcil 200mg Tablet SR can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Arcil 200mg Tablet SR?
If you forget a dose of Arcil 200mg Tablet SR, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Does Arcil 200mg Tablet SR make you drowsy?
Arcil 200mg Tablet SR can cause drowsiness and also dizziness, fatigue (tiredness) and visual disturbances.
However, it is not very common and may not affect everyone.
If you experience these symptoms avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
=

Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection is a combination of two medicines: Amoxycillin and Clavulanic acid.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like, tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection, and oral cavity infections..
The medicine works by killing the harmful bacteria that cause infections.
Is it safe to use Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection?
Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem during the course of your treatment, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection administered?
Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection?
The use of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, inform your doctor if you are allergic to any medicines.
Can the use of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Arclav 1000mg/200mg Injection takes time to show its full effect and treat your infection.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

What is Arcomet 120mg Tablet used for?
Arcomet 120mg Tablet is used to reduce the pain and swelling (inflammation) in the joints and muscles of people 16 years of age and older with rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and gout.
Arcomet 120mg Tablet is also used for the short term treatment of moderate pain after dental surgery in people 16 years of age and older.
Is Arcomet 120mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Arcomet 120mg Tablet should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect the kidneys from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, leading to kidney damage because of long-term use.
Therefore, the use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can Arcomet 120mg Tablet cause high blood pressure?
Arcomet 120mg Tablet can increase blood pressure in some people, especially in high doses, and your doctor may advise you to check your blood pressure at home or even monitor it from time to time.
If you have high blood pressure that has not been controlled by treatment, you must inform your doctor before starting treatment with Arcomet 120mg Tablet, to avoid any mishap.
Is it safe to use Arcomet 120mg Tablet?
Arcomet 120mg Tablet is safe for most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, fatigue, diarrhea, etc.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to this medication.
Can I stop taking Arcomet 120mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arcomet 120mg Tablet should be continued as advised by your doctor, if you are using the medicine for a condition associated with long-term pain.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet may cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine or a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arcomet 120mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
=

Will a higher than the recommended dose of Arcuf Plus Syrup be more effective?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having increased side effects.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms while taking Arcuf Plus Syrup, please consult your doctor.
In which type of cough will the doctor prescribe Arcuf Plus Syrup?
Arcuf Plus Syrup is indicated in the treatment of a cough that is associated with excessive mucus secretion.
Are there any contraindications associated with use of Arcuf Plus Syrup?
It is not recommended to use Arcuf Plus Syrup if you have hypersensitivity to any of the components of the formulation.
Avoid the medication if you have pre-existing ischaemic heart disease, significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease and gastric ulceration.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Arcuf Plus Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How much Arden 250mg Tablet should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Arden 250mg Tablet?
Arden 250mg Tablet usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
My child vomited after taking Arden 250mg Tablet.
If your child vomits within 30 minutes of taking Arden 250mg Tablet, repeat the dose again.
If it has been more than 30 minutes after taking Arden 250mg Tablet and your child vomits, no need to repeat the dose and wait until it is time for the next dose.
If you are not sure, consult your doctor.
Can I give Arden 250mg Tablet to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Arden 250mg Tablet.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
=

Is it safe to use Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet?
Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet is safe for most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to this medication.
Can I stop taking Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet should be continued as advised by your doctor, if you are using the medicine for a condition associated with long-term pain.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet may cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine or a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet?
The use of Arden Plus 400 mg/500 mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should be avoided in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active or recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Can the use of Ardrox 250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Ardrox 250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if Ardrox 250mg Tablet doesn't work?
Talk to your doctor if Ardrox 250mg Tablet doesn't seem to work for you.
Your doctor may increase the dose of Ardrox 250mg Tablet or switch you to an alternate option, which may work for you.
What if I don't get better after using Ardrox 250mg Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Ardrox 250mg Tablet when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Ardrox 250mg Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Is Ardrox 250mg Tablet good for urinary tract infection?
Ardrox 250mg Tablet is a relatively safe and effective antibiotic that is available for the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI).
Ardrox 250mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
=

What does Aredronet 30mg Injection do?
Aredronet 30mg Injection helps in preventing breakdown of the bones.
Bone is continuously being broken down and regenerated by special kinds of bone cells by a process called remodelling or turnover.
However, conditions like bone stress and bone marrow edema may create pain and imbalance in this daily turnover.
Aredronet 30mg Injection acts in the areas with increased bone turnover, decreases this process of breakdown and thereby reduces the pain and discomfort associated with it.
How is Aredronet 30mg Injection administered?
Aredronet 30mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a doctor or a trained healthcare professional and should not be self-administered.
It is given as a 1-2 hour infusion by a drip into a vein in your arm.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Aredronet 30mg Injection.
How often will I be given Aredronet 30mg Injection?
Your dose of Aredronet 30mg Injection will be decided by your doctor depending on your condition.
Usually, an individual requires 1-3 doses of Aredronet 30mg Injection.However, the exact dose and its frequency will depend on your illness and how well you respond to the treatment.
Is Aredronet 30mg Injection safe in pregnancy or breastfeeding?
No, Aredronet 30mg Injection may not be safe in pregnancy or breastfeeding.
Although Aredronet 30mg Injection does not affect the fertility of women or the sperm count in males, it is best to consult your doctor before taking Aredronet 30mg Injection.
In general, avoid Aredronet 30mg Injection if you are pregnant, planning to get pregnant or breastfeeding to avoid any harmful effects on the baby.
There is not enough data available to know the exact effect of Aredronet 30mg Injection on the unborn baby or via breast milk.
Also, women who are taking Aredronet 30mg Injection are advised to avoid pregnancy after 6 months of completing treatment with Aredronet 30mg Injection..
This is because traces of Aredronet 30mg Injection stays in the bones for long periods of time and may be released during this time which can cause harm to the baby.
Does Aredronet 30mg Injection cause hair loss?
Yes, Aredronet 30mg Injection can cause hair loss, but this is not a common side effect.
If you experience hair loss while taking this medication immediately report to your doctor and follow the advice given.
=

Can Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet be stopped when my symptoms are gone?
No, Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any problems due to the consumption of Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Do not stop even you feel better.
Stopping Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet early may make the infection come back and harder to treat.
Can the use of Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use ofArena A 6mg/400mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicines without consulting your doctor.
Will Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet be more effective if taken in more than recommended dose?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If you do not find any relief in your symptoms even after taking the recommended doses, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arena A 6mg/400mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

How much Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension?
Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
Can I give Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension is considered as an overdose?
You should only take four doses of Arepar 250mg Oral Suspension in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
Is there any special diet my child needs to follow while taking this medicine?
Unless instructed by your doctor, your child should take a normal balanced diet while continuing this medicine as lack of nutrition can put your child at risk of developing medicinal toxicity.
Where should I store this medicine?
=

Can I undergo cosmetic procedures while taking Aret 0.025 Gel?
Your doctor will decide whether you can continue taking or stop taking Aret 0.025 Gel before cosmetic procedures.
However, it is advised to not undergo hair removal or laser treatments while using Aret 0.025 Gel.
Please inform your doctor about all the medicines you are taking before starting the treatment with this medicine.
Also, consult the doctor before starting any cosmetic procedure.
Is it safe to use Aret 0.025 Gel?
Yes, Aret 0.025 Gel is safe to use when taken as advised by your doctor.
However, like all medicines, even this medicine has some side effects, but it is not necessary that anyone who is taking these medicines might get these side effects.
Please talk to your doctor if you get any unpleasant effects while taking this medicine.
How long am I supposed to use Aret 0.025 Gel?
Your doctor will decide the duration of your treatment depending on the severity of your disease and the results of your lab tests.
Usually, the treatment with Aret 0.025 Gel takes around 4-5 months.
I am taking Aret 0.025 Gel.
What should I do if I am planning to become pregnant?
It is important to consult your doctor if you are planning to become pregnant while taking Aret 0.025 Gel.
Ideally, pregnancy is not advised because this medicine can harm your baby.
However, if you do get pregnant during the treatment with Aret 0.025 Gel, consult your doctor.
Why does Aret 0.025 Gel cause dry skin, dry lips and dry nose? How to manage these?
One of the most common side effects of Aret 0.025 Gel includes dryness of skin, nose and lips.
Aret 0.025 Gel reduces the secretion of oil which results in skin dryness.
Dryness due to Aret 0.025 Gel can be managed by applying moisturizers or lubricants like Vaseline.
You can also apply lip balm to relieve cracked and dry lips.
Drink enough water to keep our body hydrated.
=

Aretop-DSR Capsule is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Aretop-DSR Capsule?
Aretop-DSR Capsule is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aretop-DSR Capsule?
The use of Aretop-DSR Capsule is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Aretop-DSR Capsule cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aretop-DSR Capsule can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Aretop-DSR Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aretop-DSR Capsule can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
=

What is A Rex 10mg Tablet? What is it used for?
A Rex 10mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
A Rex 10mg Tablet effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Is A Rex 10mg Tablet safe?
A Rex 10mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does A Rex 10mg Tablet work for allergies?
A Rex 10mg Tablet works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of A Rex 10mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of A Rex 10mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Is A Rex 10mg Tablet effective?
A Rex 10mg Tablet is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using A Rex 10mg Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking A Rex 10mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking A Rex 10mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

What if I give too much of Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension by mistake?
Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension is unlikely to cause any harm if an extra dose is given by mistake.
However, if you think you have given too much of Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension?
Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which all lab tests should my child undergo while taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension on a long term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
Can Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension impact my child’s digestion?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking medicines.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may too get affected.
Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension may kill off good bacteria along with the bad ones, increasing your child’s risk of developing other infections.
So, in case your child is having diarrhea while on Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Why is Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regimen advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension a strong antibiotic?
Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
Can you get a yeast infection from taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension?
Some people may get a fungal or yeast infection known as thrush after taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension.
Antibiotics such as Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension can kill the normal or ‘good bacteria’ of your intestine responsible for preventing thrush.
You should inform your doctor if you get a sore or vaginal itching or discharge.
Also, inform your doctor if you get a white patch in the mouth or tongue after taking Arezit 200mg Oral Suspension or soon after stopping it.
=

Is it safe to use Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet?
Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause some unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem due to this medication.
Can I stop taking Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet should be continued as advised by your doctor, if you are using the medicine for a condition associated with long-term pain.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet may cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine or a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, do not drive or use any machines.
It is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Arfen P 400mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components of this medicine.
It should be avoided in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active or recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is Arflur 50mg Tablet a good painkiller?
Arflur 50mg Tablet is effective in relieving pain and inflammation.
It is used to provide relief from various sorts of pain such as sprains, strains and other injuries.
It is also helpful in various types of arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation following surgery.
Arflur 50mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Does Arflur 50mg Tablet get you high?
No, Arflur 50mg Tablet does not get you high.
It does not have an abuse potential (drug-seeking behavior) and does not cause physical or psychological dependence.
However, if you do not feel well, consult your doctor.
Can Arflur 50mg Tablet hurt your kidneys?
Long-term use and high doses of Arflur 50mg Tablet may cause renal problems, such as protein or blood in urine and pain during urination.
Patients who had or have heart failure, impaired kidney function and hypertension are at risk of kidney problems.
The risk of developing kidney problems is also high in patients who are on medicines which cause excess urination (diuretics), or medicines which have significant impact on kidney function.
Along with that, Arflur 50mg Tablet can affect kidneys of patients who are above 65 years of age or who remain dehydrated.
Therefore, kidney function monitoring is recommended for such patients.
What if I forget to take a dose of Arflur 50mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Arflur 50mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
=

What is Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Argella M 5mg/10mg Tablet.
=

Argex 500mg Capsule is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
What if I don't get better?
You should inform your doctor if you do not notice any improvement in your symptoms after 3 days of taking Argex 500mg Capsule.
Also, if your symptoms get worse, inform your doctor immediately.
Can the use of Argex 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Argex 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can Argex 500mg Capsule be taken at night?
Argex 500mg Capsule is usually prescribed once daily.
You can take it at any time of the day, but remember to take it at the same time each day.
The medicine should be taken 1 hour before meals or 2 hours after eating food.
You can take the tablet preparation with or without food.
However, you must take Argex 500mg Capsule exactly as advised by your doctor and ask your doctor if you have any doubts.
How long does it take Argex 500mg Capsule to work?
Argex 500mg Capsule starts working within a few hours of taking it.
You may notice an improvement in symptoms after a few days.
Do not stop taking the medicine without completing the course mentioned by your doctor.
Stopping the medicine without consulting your doctor may cause the infection to come back which may be more difficult to treat.
Why is Argex 500mg Capsule given for 3 days?
The duration of treatment depends on the type of infection being treated and the age of the patient.
Argex 500mg Capsule is not necessarily given for 3 days.
In most bacterial infections, a single dose of 500 mg is given for 3 days.
Alternatively, it can be given as 500 mg once on day 1 and then 250 mg once from day 2 to day 5.
In some cases of infection such as genital ulcer disease, it is given as a single 1 gram dose.
Therefore, you must stick to the regime advised by your doctor.
What should I avoid while taking Argex 500mg Capsule?
Generally, it is recommended that patients taking Argex 500mg Capsule should avoid taking any antacid with this medicine as this can affect the overall effectiveness of Argex 500mg Capsule.
It is also recommended to avoid exposure to sunlight or tanning beds as Argex 500mg Capsule increases the risk of sunburn.
Is Argex 500mg Capsule a strong antibiotic?
Argex 500mg Capsule is an effective antibiotic that is used for the treatment of many bacterial infections.
Compared to other antibiotics, Argex 500mg Capsule has a longer half-life which means that it stays in the body for a long time because of which it is given once a day and for a short span of time.
Other antibiotics comparatively have a shorter half-life and are usually given twice, thrice, or four times a day.
=

Who should not use Arh 150mg Injection?
Use of Arh 150mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Arh 150mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Arh 150mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Arh 150mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Arh 150mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Arh 150mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Arh 150mg Injection administered?
Arh 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

What is Ariacort 40 Injection used for?
Ariacort 40 Injection has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant properties.
It is used to treat many autoimmune diseases (these diseases happen when your body’s immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage).
It also helps in the treatment of conditions like rheumatoid disorders and severe allergic reactions.
Along with that, Ariacort 40 Injection is used as an additive in anesthetic solutions as it has pain and inflammation relieving properties.
How does Ariacort 40 Injection work?
Ariacort 40 Injection works by reducing the inflammation which helps in treating many illnesses associated with active inflammation.
Also, it stops the autoimmune reactions which occur when your body's immune system attacks the body itself and causes damage.
How is Ariacort 40 Injection administered?
Ariacort 40 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Ariacort 40 Injection.
Ariacort 40 Injection is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Ariacort 40 Injection too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
When will I feel better after taking Ariacort 40 Injection?
Ariacort 40 Injection effectively treats pain and inflammation.
However, its effect may vary from person to person, depending on the condition you are being treated for and also your body weight.
Your doctor will prescribe you Ariacort 40 Injection in the dose that suits your requirement.
=

What is Aribzol 20mg Tablet used for?
Aribzol 20mg Tablet is used for the treatment of stomach and intestinal ulcers (gastric and duodenal ulcers), reflux esophagitis, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
Aribzol 20mg Tablet also prevents acidity associated with the use of painkillers and stress ulcers in critically ill people.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
How long does it take for Aribzol 20mg Tablet to work?
Aribzol 20mg Tablet starts working within an hour of taking it and shows maximum benefit within two to four hours.
You should start feeling better within 2 to 3 days but it may take up to 4 weeks to relieve your symptoms significantly.
What is the best time to take Aribzol 20mg Tablet?
It is best to take Aribzol 20mg Tablet before your breakfast.
If you are taking two doses, take it in the morning and evening.
Aribzol 20mg Tablet is more effective when it is taken an hour before your food.
Can I stop taking Aribzol 20mg Tablet if I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aribzol 20mg Tablet before completing the full course of treatment.
You will start to feel better before your treatment is complete.
Does Aribzol 20mg Tablet cause bone problems?
Yes, long-term use of Aribzol 20mg Tablet can cause thinning of bones, which is called osteoporosis.
Aribzol 20mg Tablet decreases the calcium absorption leading to calcium deficiency and increases the risk of bone fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine.
Take an adequate amount of calcium in your diet or take the supplements as advised by your doctor to avoid any bone problems.
=

Can I stop taking Aricef O Plus Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aricef O Plus Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Aricef O Plus Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Aricef O Plus Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Aricef O Plus Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Aricef O Plus Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Does the use of Aricef O Plus Tablet help treat Urinary tract infections (UTIs)?
The use of Aricef O Plus Tablet is advised in the treatment of Urinary tract infections (UTIs).
What are the treatment options of UTI and how to prevent it?
Take your antibiotics exactly as prescribed and never skip doses.
It will help cure the infection faster.
Change personal hygiene habits and urinate before and after sexual activity.
Drink plenty of water to help clear the bacteria from your body and always try to fully empty your bladder when you pee.
=

What is Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol, and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to take Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
It is safe to take this medicine for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea.
If you experience any persistent problem due to the medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
This medicine is usually used for the short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, continued taking it if your doctor has advised you to do so.
Can Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food, or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to your doctor.
Can Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of this medicine can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with taking Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet?
The use of this medicine is considered harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
Its use should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcers/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can I take Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, this medicine can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While it helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Ariclo SP 100mg/325mg/15mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, long-term use of this medicine can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
The use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body, which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
The use of painkillers is not recommended in patients with underlying kidney disease.
=

Is Arident 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arident 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arident 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arident 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arident 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arident 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arident 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arident 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arident 10mg Tablet?
Arident 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arident 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arident 10mg Tablet?
Arident 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arident 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Aridix 10 Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aridix 10 Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aridix 10 Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aridix 10 Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aridix 10 Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aridix 10 Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aridix 10 Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aridix 10 Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aridix 10 Tablet?
Aridix 10 Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aridix 10 Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aridix 10 Tablet?
Aridix 10 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Aridix 10 Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Drotaverine and Mefenamic acid.
This medication helps to relieve abdominal pain.
Drotaverine relieves muscle spasms associated with smooth muscles in the abdomen.
Mefenamic Acid works by blocking the release of certain chemical messengers that cause pain and inflammation (swelling).
Is it safe to use Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Yes, Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients with abdominal pain.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhoea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
Can I stop taking Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small and frequent sips.
Also, avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with the medicine.
Talk to your doctor if you have vomiting persists and you notice any signs of dehydration like less urination with dark coloured and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
Can the use of Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Avoid spicy, salty and acidic foods (like lemons).
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, do not take a higher than the recommended dose of Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet as it can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Aridrot 80mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is Arifine 20mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arifine 20mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arifine 20mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arifine 20mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arifine 20mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arifine 20mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arifine 20mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arifine 20mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arifine 20mg Tablet?
Arifine 20mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arifine 20mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arifine 20mg Tablet?
Arifine 20mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arifine 20mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Can I stop taking Arifix-O Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arifix-O Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
What if I miss my dose?
Take Arifix-O Tablet as soon as you remember it.
However, do not take it if it's almost time for your next dose.
Also, do not take an extra dose to make up for your missed dose.
Can the use of Arifix-O Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arifix-O Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
What if I don't get better after using Arifix-O Tablet?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Does the use of Arifix-O Tablet help treat Urinary tract infections (UTIs)?
The use of Arifix-O Tablet is advised in the treatment of Urinary tract infections (UTIs).
What are the treatment options of UTI and how to prevent it?
Take your antibiotics exactly as prescribed and never skip doses.
It will help cure the infection faster.
Change personal hygiene habits and urinate before and after sexual activity.
Drink plenty of water to help clear the bacteria from your body and always try to fully empty your bladder when you pee.
Can I drive while I am taking Arifix-O Tablet?
No, taking Arifix-O Tablet may make you feel sleepy, dizzy or could affect your eyesight.
So, do not drive or use machines until you know how this medicine affects you.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arifix-O Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is Ariford MD 5 Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Ariford MD 5 Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Ariford MD 5 Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Ariford MD 5 Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Ariford MD 5 Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Ariford MD 5 Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Ariford MD 5 Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Ariford MD 5 Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Ariford MD 5 Tablet?
Ariford MD 5 Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Ariford MD 5 Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Ariford MD 5 Tablet?
Ariford MD 5 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Ariford MD 5 Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

What is Arigaba ME 300 Tablet?
Arigaba ME 300 Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Gabapentin and Methylcobalamin.
This medication is useful in the treatment of pain due to nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
This medication works by regenerating damaged nerves in the body and decreasing the pain sensation.
The nerves in the periphery of your body, such as the nerves in your toes and fingertip are called peripheral nerves and any damage to one or more of these nerves is called peripheral neuropathy.
These nerves carry messages to/from the brain and spinal cord from/to the rest of the body.
A damage caused to these nerves stops them from functioning properly and the messages traveling between your central and peripheral nervous system get disrupted.
Can I stop taking Arigaba ME 300 Tablet when my pain is relieved?
No, take Arigaba ME 300 Tablet for the full prescribed length of time.
Your symptoms may improve before the nerves are completely regenerated and healed.
Can the use of Arigaba ME 300 Tablet cause sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Arigaba ME 300 Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol while taking Arigaba ME 300 Tablet as it can lead to severe sleepiness , causing falls or accidents.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Arigaba ME 300 Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects and toxicity.
If you are experiencing increased severity of your symptoms that are not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What is the recommended storage condition for the Arigaba ME 300 Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Is Arikem 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arikem 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arikem 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arikem 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arikem 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arikem 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arikem 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arikem 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arikem 10mg Tablet?
Arikem 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arikem 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arikem 10mg Tablet?
Arikem 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arikem 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Arilan 15mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arilan 15mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arilan 15mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arilan 15mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arilan 15mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arilan 15mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arilan 15mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arilan 15mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arilan 15mg Tablet?
Arilan 15mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arilan 15mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arilan 15mg Tablet?
Arilan 15mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arilan 15mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Does Arimidex 1mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Yes, Arimidex 1mg Tablet may cause weight gain, but it is not very common.
There could be other reasons as well which can lead to weight gain such as menopause.
However, if you gain weight while taking Arimidex 1mg Tablet, take low-calorie diet and exercise regularly.
Consult your doctor or a nutritionist to help you lose weight.
Does Arimidex 1mg Tablet cause hair loss?
Yes, Arimidex 1mg Tablet commonly affects the hair by making them thin which further leads to hair loss.
However, it does not occur in everyone.
Hair thinning probably occurs due to estrogen lowering effect of Arimidex 1mg Tablet.
These effects are not permanent and may revert after some time.
If it concerns you then talk to your doctor for another alternative medicine to avoid damage to hair.
Why do bodybuilders use Arimidex 1mg Tablet?
Bodybuilders who take anabolic steroids for bodybuilding take Arimidex 1mg Tablet to reduce the production of estrogen which is a side effect of anabolic steroids.
An increase in estrogen levels in bodybuilders may result in high pitched female voice, shrinking of the testicles or penis, and breast enlargement.
In order to avoid such characteristics bodybuilders take Arimidex 1mg Tablet.
Can Arimidex 1mg Tablet be taken at night?
Arimidex 1mg Tablet can be taken anytime of the day.
Take it exactly as prescribed by your doctor.
You can take it with or without food.
Do not crush, break, or chew the tablet.
While on Arimidex 1mg Tablet how should patients be monitored?
While you are taking Arimidex 1mg Tablet your doctor will get blood tests done to check blood cell counts and investigate liver and kidney functions.
Along with that, the doctor may advise a bone scan if you are at risk for osteoporosis, which may also occur due to Arimidex 1mg Tablet treatment.
=

Can I stop taking Arina-D Tablet if I feel well?
You should continue to take Arina-D Tablet until your doctor asks you to stop it.
If you stop taking Arina-D Tablet sooner than advised, the symptoms of vertigo may reappear (dizziness and spinning).
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Arina-D Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the packet or container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can the use of Arina-D Tablet cause drowsiness?
Yes, Arina-D Tablet can make you feel drowsy.
Avoid driving, operating machinery, working at heights or participating in potentially dangerous activities until you know how this medicine affects you.
What if I accidentally take too much of Arina-D Tablet?
Visit the nearest emergency department if you accidentally take too much of Arina-D Tablet.
What if I miss a dose of Arina-D Tablet?
If you miss a dose of Arina-D Tablet, you should skip the missed dose and take the next dose at its usual time and quantity.
You should not take a double dose of Arina-D Tablet to make up for a missed dose.
=

Can I increase or decrease the dose of my child’s medicine by myself?
No, it is not recommended to alter the dose of the medicine without consulting a doctor.
While increasing the dose without proper judgment may lead to toxicity, decreasing it may cause recurrence of symptoms.
So, for best results, speak to your child’s doctor if you feel a change in dose may be needed.
How much Arinox Plus Suspension should I give to my child?
Your doctor will prescribe the dose according to your child’s condition and body weight.
Stick to the prescribed dosing schedule as that is the best way to ensure the safe and complete recovery of your child.
How should Arinox Plus Suspension be stored?
Arinox Plus Suspension should be stored at room temperature, in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can all children be given the same dose of Arinox Plus Suspension?
Arinox Plus Suspension cannot be given to everyone in the same dose.
The doctor decides the appropriate dose of Arinox Plus Suspension based on the child’s age and body weight.
When will my child feel better?
You may be required to give Arinox Plus Suspension to your child for a few days to weeks, depending upon the severity of the infection.If your child continues to feel unwell even after completion of the full prescribed course of the medicine, consult your child’s doctor as soon as possible.
Are there any serious side effects of this medicine for my child?
Although Arinox Plus Suspension is well-tolerated by children, if you notice your child experiencing any intolerable episodes like persistent vomiting, body swelling, decreased urine frequency, or serious allergic reaction, rush to your doctor on an immediate basis.
=

Is Aripat 10mg Tablet MD a mood stabilizer?
Aripat 10mg Tablet MD is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripat 10mg Tablet MD take to work?
The benefit of Aripat 10mg Tablet MD may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripat 10mg Tablet MD.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripat 10mg Tablet MD affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripat 10mg Tablet MD may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripat 10mg Tablet MD.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripat 10mg Tablet MD?
Aripat 10mg Tablet MD is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripat 10mg Tablet MD, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripat 10mg Tablet MD?
Aripat 10mg Tablet MD may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Aripat 10mg Tablet MD be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Aripel 15mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aripel 15mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripel 15mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aripel 15mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripel 15mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripel 15mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripel 15mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripel 15mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripel 15mg Tablet?
Aripel 15mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripel 15mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripel 15mg Tablet?
Aripel 15mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
=

Is Aripicon 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aripicon 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripicon 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aripicon 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripicon 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripicon 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripicon 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripicon 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripicon 10mg Tablet?
Aripicon 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripicon 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripicon 10mg Tablet?
Aripicon 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
=

Is Aripiz 30mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aripiz 30mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripiz 30mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aripiz 30mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripiz 30mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripiz 30mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripiz 30mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripiz 30mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripiz 30mg Tablet?
Aripiz 30mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripiz 30mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripiz 30mg Tablet?
Aripiz 30mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Aripiz 30mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
Aripiz 30mg Tablet may cause an increase in blood sugar levels.
Extremely high levels of blood sugar may cause coma and death.
Therefore, if you have diabetes, you should stay alert and check your blood sugar levels regularly.
Does Aripiz 30mg Tablet cause weight gain?
Aripiz 30mg Tablet may cause weight gain in some patients.
This medicine may also increase the cholesterol and fat levels in the blood.
If you gain weight during treatment with Aripiz 30mg Tablet, consult your doctor for diet and exercise advice.
=

Is Arip MT 5 Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arip MT 5 Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arip MT 5 Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arip MT 5 Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arip MT 5 Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arip MT 5 Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arip MT 5 Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arip MT 5 Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arip MT 5 Tablet?
Arip MT 5 Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arip MT 5 Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arip MT 5 Tablet?
Arip MT 5 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arip MT 5 Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Aripomine 15mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aripomine 15mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripomine 15mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aripomine 15mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripomine 15mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripomine 15mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripomine 15mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripomine 15mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripomine 15mg Tablet?
Aripomine 15mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripomine 15mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripomine 15mg Tablet?
Aripomine 15mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Aripomine 15mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

What is Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet used for?
Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet is used to relieve excess (moderate to severe) anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
It is not to be used for mild anxiety associated with the stress of day to day life situations.
Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor.
Is Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet addictive (habit-forming)?
Yes, the use of Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet has addictive potential.
Its use is associated with the risk of addiction for physical or psychological effects.
The abrupt discontinuation of Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet is therefore not advised to avoid serious withdrawal symptoms.
Is Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet an opioid?
No, Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet is not an opioid, it belongs to a class of substances called benzodiazepines.
Is Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet an anti-depressant?
No, Ariprax 0.25mg Tablet is not an anti-depressant.
It is used to relieve excess anxiety and to treat anxiety associated with depression.
=

Is Aripzo 15mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aripzo 15mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aripzo 15mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aripzo 15mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aripzo 15mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aripzo 15mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aripzo 15mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aripzo 15mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aripzo 15mg Tablet?
Aripzo 15mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aripzo 15mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aripzo 15mg Tablet?
Aripzo 15mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
=

Is Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD a mood stabilizer?
Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD take to work?
The benefit of Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD affect you sexually?
Yes, Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD?
Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD?
Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD be taken by diabetics?
Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD may cause an increase in blood sugar levels.
Extremely high levels of blood sugar may cause coma and death.
Therefore, if you have diabetes, you should stay alert and check your blood sugar levels regularly.
Does Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD cause weight gain?
Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD may cause weight gain in some patients.
This medicine may also increase the cholesterol and fat levels in the blood.
If you gain weight during treatment with Arirazo 5mg Tablet MD, consult your doctor for diet and exercise advice.
=

How much Arismol Oral Suspension should I give to my child?
Always follow your doctor's instructions regarding how much of the medicine to give and how often to give it.
This depends on the strength of the medicine and the age of your child.
You may also check the label or the leaflet inside the packaging for directions before use.
The commonly recommended dose is 10-15 mg/kg per dose every 4 to 6 hours.
In case you are not sure how much to give, consult your child’s doctor.
When will my child’s condition improve after taking Arismol Oral Suspension?
Arismol Oral Suspension usually starts working within 30 to 60 mins of intake and shows its peak effect within 3 to 4 hours.
Your child may start to feel better after a few doses.
In case the pain or fever persists longer, consult your child’s doctor immediately.
My child vomited after taking Arismol Oral Suspension.
If your child vomits within 30 minutes of taking Arismol Oral Suspension, repeat the dose again.
If it has been more than 30 minutes after taking Arismol Oral Suspension and your child vomits, no need to repeat the dose and wait until it is time for the next dose.
If you are not sure, consult your doctor.
Can I give Arismol Oral Suspension to my child for low-grade fever?
You can give this medicine if your child has a temperature of 38.3°C (101°F) or higher.
But, you must always try to speak to your child’s doctor first.
My child’s fever is persistent even after taking Arismol Oral Suspension.
If the fever doesn't come down after the initial few doses, the cause might be an infection (virus or bacteria).
It is advised to consult your child’s doctor for specific treatment.
How much of Arismol Oral Suspension is considered as overdose?
You should only take four doses of Arismol Oral Suspension in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4-6 hours between two doses.
Do not take it for more than 3 days without first talking to your doctor.
Based on the dose, more than 250 mg/kg can lead to toxicity and can be potentially fatal.
An overdose is capable of causing serious damage to the liver and kidneys.
Inform your doctor immediately if you think you have given too much of this medicine to your child, even if your child seems well, because of the risk of delayed, serious liver damage.
=

Can the use of Arispod-S 375 Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Arispod-S 375 Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Arispod-S 375 Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arispod-S 375 Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Arispod-S 375 Injection takes to work?
Usually, Arispod-S 375 Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Arispod-S 375 Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Arispod-S 375 Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arispod-S 375 Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

How long does Aristogyl 400 Tablet take to work?
Usually, Aristogyl 400 Tablet starts working within 1 hour of its ingestion.
However, it may take around 2-3 days to make you feel better while taking Aristogyl 400 Tablet.
If you do not experience any significant reduction in your symptoms, consult your doctor.
Can I drink alcohol while using Aristogyl 400 Tablet?
No, avoid drinking alcohol while taking Aristogyl 400 Tablet.
Moreover, you should avoid alcohol even after 3 days of finishing the complete course.
Drinking alcohol can cause an unpleasant reaction (disulfiram like reaction) with symptoms such as stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, headache, flushing or redness of the face.
Can the use of Aristogyl 400 Tablet cause metallic taste?
Yes, Aristogyl 400 Tablet may cause a temporary metallic taste.
This metallic taste can be reduced by staying hydrated, brushing teeth after the meals and chewing sugar-free gum or mints.
What if I take more than the recommended dose of Aristogyl 400 Tablet?
If you have taken Aristogyl 400 Tablet in excess (more than the recommended dose), immediately contact your doctor or report to the nearest hospital.
Overdose of Aristogyl 400 Tablet may cause loss of appetite, metallic taste, headache, dizziness, insomnia or drowsiness.
Can I stop taking Aristogyl 400 Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Aristogyl 400 Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Hence, if you stop taking the medicine before completing the course, your infection may come back.
Consult your doctor before you stop taking Aristogyl 400 Tablet and follow their advice.
What if there is no improvement after using Aristogyl 400 Tablet?
=

Is Arisun 20mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arisun 20mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arisun 20mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arisun 20mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arisun 20mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arisun 20mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arisun 20mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arisun 20mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arisun 20mg Tablet?
Arisun 20mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arisun 20mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arisun 20mg Tablet?
Arisun 20mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arisun 20mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Aritina 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Aritina 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Aritina 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Aritina 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Aritina 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Aritina 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Aritina 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Aritina 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Aritina 10mg Tablet?
Aritina 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Aritina 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Aritina 10mg Tablet?
Aritina 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Aritina 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

What is Aritryp Tablet used for?
This is a combination of three medicines: Bromelain, Trypsin and Rutoside.
Bromelain and Trypsin are enzymes which increase blood supply in the affected area and help the body produce substances that fight pain and swelling.
Rutoside is an antioxidant which protects the body from any damage caused by chemicals (free radicals) and further reduces swelling.
No, Trypsin is not a hormone.
It is an enzyme, a protein and an endopeptidase.
What is the recommended storage condition for Aritryp Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Arive 20mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arive 20mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arive 20mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arive 20mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arive 20mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arive 20mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arive 20mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arive 20mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arive 20mg Tablet?
Arive 20mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arive 20mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arive 20mg Tablet?
Arive 20mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arive 20mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

My child is suffering from a seizure disorder.
Can I give Arixime Syrup to my child?
Arixime Syrup may cause seizure activity, particularly in children who have kidney disease.
So, Arixime Syrup should be used with caution in children with a history of seizure disorder.
If seizures occur, discontinue Arixime Syrup and visit your child’s doctor right away.
What if I give too much of Arixime Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Arixime Syrup is unlikely to harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Arixime Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Arixime Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Arixime Syrup?
Arixime Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Arixime Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Arixime Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
=

Can the use of Arixtra 2.5mg Injection increase the risk of bleeding?
Yes, Arixtra 2.5mg Injection increases the risk of bleeding, and the affects of Arixtra 2.5mg Injection may last for 4 days even after stopping this medicine.
Always be careful while doing activities that may cause an injury or bleeding.
=

Is Arizep 10mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arizep 10mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arizep 10mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arizep 10mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arizep 10mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arizep 10mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arizep 10mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arizep 10mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arizep 10mg Tablet?
Arizep 10mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arizep 10mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arizep 10mg Tablet?
Arizep 10mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arizep 10mg Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Arizin L 5mg Tablet a steroid? What is it used for?
No, Arizin L 5mg Tablet is not a steroid.
It is an anti-allergic medication which is used to relieve the symptoms of allergy.
It relieves runny nose, sneezing and redness, itching and watering of the eyes caused by hay fever or seasonal allergies.
It also relieves similar symptoms caused due to allergies to substances, such as dust mites, animal dander and mold.
Additionally, it is helpful in treating symptoms of hives, including itching and rash.
Does Arizin L 5mg Tablet make you tired and drowsy?
Yes, Arizin L 5mg Tablet can make you feel tired, sleepy and weak.
If you have these symptoms, avoid driving or operating heavy machinery.
Consult your doctor if not sure.
How long does it take for Arizin L 5mg Tablet to work?
Arizin L 5mg Tablet starts working and showing improvement within an hour of taking it.
However, it may take a little longer to notice the full benefits.
Can I take Arizin L 5mg Tablet and Fexofenadine together?
Sometimes the doctor may advise you to take two different antihistamines together if you are being treated for a severe itchy rash.
If you are taking Arizin L 5mg Tablet during the daytime, your doctor may prescribe another antihistamine for the night which causes sleepiness, especially if the itch makes it difficult for you to sleep.
Is it safe to take Arizin L 5mg Tablet for a long time?
Arizin L 5mg Tablet is safe if used as prescribed by your doctor.
Moreover, it is unlikely to harm you if you take it for a long time.
But, it is best to take Arizin L 5mg Tablet for only as long as you need it.
For how long should I continue Arizin L 5mg Tablet?
The duration for which the medicine needs to be taken depends on the problem being treated.
For instance, if you are taking it for an insect bite, you may need it for a day or two.
While, if you are taking it to prevent symptoms of chronic allergic rhinitis (inflammation of nose) or chronic urticaria, you may need to take Arizin L 5mg Tablet for a longer time.
Talk to your doctor if you are unsure about the duration of using Arizin L 5mg Tablet
=

Arjupep 4.5 Injection is a combination of two medicines.
It is used to treat bacterial infections like tonsillitis, sinusitis, otitis media, respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, boils, abscesses, cellulitis, wound infection, bone infection and oral cavity infections.
Is it safe to use Arjupep 4.5 Injection?
Arjupep 4.5 Injection is safe to use when taken as advised by the doctor.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, rash, allergic reaction, etc.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine, inform your doctor as soon as possible.
How is Arjupep 4.5 Injection administered?
Arjupep 4.5 Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
Follow your doctor’s instructions carefully to get maximum benefit from Arjupep 4.5 Injection.
Are there any specific cautions associated with the use of Arjupep 4.5 Injection?
The use of Arjupep 4.5 Injection is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to penicillins or any other ingredient of the medicine.
It should not be used in patients with a history of liver disease.
Therefore, consult your doctor before using Arjupep 4.5 Injection.
Can the use of Arjupep 4.5 Injection cause contraceptive failure?
Yes, the use of Arjupep 4.5 Injection can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Consult your doctor and seek advice regarding the use of other methods of contraception (e.g., condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Arjupep 4.5 Injection.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of Arjupep 4.5 Injection?
No, Arjupep 4.5 Injection should be used in the recommended dose only.
Overdose of Arjupep 4.5 Injection can increase the risks of side effects.
Arjupep 4.5 Injection may take some time to show its full effect and treat your infection, be patient.
If you experience increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Arjupep 4.5 Injection?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Arkaflam Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Diclofenac, Paracetamol, and Chlorzoxazone.
This medication helps in relieving muscle pain.
Chlorzoxazone is a muscle relaxant which works by acting on the central nervous system.
Diclofenac and Paracetamol work by lowering the chemical substance (prostaglandins) in the body that causes pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Arkaflam Tablet?
Arkaflam Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, stomach pain, diarrhea, loss of appetite, dryness in the mouth, weakness, sleepiness and other uncommon or rare side effects.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Arkaflam Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arkaflam Tablet should be continued if advised for a specific time duration by your doctor.
However, it can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arkaflam Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arkaflam Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
In case, you experience nausea while taking this medicine, take it with milk, food or with antacids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arkaflam Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arkaflam Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Arkaflam Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Arkaflam Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protect them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Arkaflam Tablet can increase the risks of side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Arkaflam Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Can the use of Arkamox 500mg Capsule cause failure of contraceptive pills?
Yes, the use of Arkamox 500mg Capsule can lower the efficacy of birth control pills.
Ask your doctor about using some other methods of contraception (such as a condom, diaphragm, spermicide) while you are taking Arkamox 500mg Capsule.
Arkamox 500mg Capsule is usually considered to be safe when taken as advised by your doctor.
Does Arkamox 500mg Capsule cause drowsiness?
No, Arkamox 500mg Capsule has not been reported to cause drowsiness.
In case you experience drowsiness while taking Arkamox 500mg Capsule, please consult your doctor.
Can Arkamox 500mg Capsule cause allergic reaction?
Although it is rare but yes, Arkamox 500mg Capsule can cause allergic reaction and is harmful in patients with known allergy to penicillins.
Get emergency medical help if you have any of the signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Arkamox 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arkamox 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic and it kills the harmful bacteria, however, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
=

Ark-AP Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Ark-AP Tablet?
Ark-AP Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Ark-AP Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Ark-AP Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Ark-AP Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Ark-AP Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Ark-AP Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Ark-AP Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Ark-AP Tablet?
The use of Ark-AP Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Who should not use Arkex 50mg Tablet?
Use of Arkex 50mg Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Arkex 50mg Tablet or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Arkex 50mg Tablet for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Arkex 50mg Tablet?
Before starting treatment with Arkex 50mg Tablet, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Arkex 50mg Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Arkex 50mg Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Arkex 50mg Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can I stop taking Arkex 50mg Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arkex 50mg Tablet without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

Can the use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers (NSAIDs) or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can the use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Arkox P 60mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

Arlevo Tablet is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
What if I forget to take a dose of Arlevo Tablet?
If you forget a dose of Arlevo Tablet, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Can the use of Arlevo Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arlevo Tablet can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
Can I stop taking Arlevo Tablet when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arlevo Tablet and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
If you stop using Arlevo Tablet too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Continue taking Arlevo Tablet in the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Can the use of Arlevo Tablet increase the risk of muscle damage?
Yes, the use of Arlevo Tablet is known to increase the risk of muscle damage, commonly in the ankle.
Muscle damage can happen in people of all ages who take Arlevo Tablet but it may be more significant in people above 60 years of age.
Inform your doctor if you feel any kind of muscle pain while using this medicine.
=

What is Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR?
Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Pantoprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity, heartburn or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
On the other hand, Domperidone helps to control vomiting.
It increases the movement of the stomach and intestines which allows the food to move more easily through the stomach.
Is it safe to use Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR?
Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients, it may cause common side effects like diarrhea, stomach pain, flatulence, dryness in the mouth, dizziness, headache, and other uncommon and rare side effects.
If you experience any persistent problem while taking this medication, inform your doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR?
The use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to pantoprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips of water during the day and keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have a dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR can cause diarrhea.
In case, you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arloc D 30mg/40mg Tablet SR?
=

How to use Armbri-T Eye Drop?
Wash your hands before applying Armbri-T Eye Drop to avoid contamination, and do not touch the tip of the dropper.
If you wear contact lenses, remove them before using Armbri-T Eye Drop.
For applying Armbri-T Eye Drop, tilt your head back, look up, and pull down the lower eyelid to make a pouch and then put the drops in the pouch.
Can Armbri-T Eye Drop be stopped when symptoms are relieved?
No, Armbri-T Eye Drop should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If any problems are experienced due to the use of Armbri-T Eye Drop, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Armbri-T Eye Drop cause blurry vision?
Armbri-T Eye Drop can blur your eyes for a short period of time.
Avoid driving or operating machinery just after using Armbri-T Eye Drop.
What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Armbri-T Eye Drop?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
What are the contraindications associated with the use of Armbri-T Eye Drop?
Armbri-T Eye Drop should not be used by patients who are hypersensitive to Timolol, Brimonidine or any of its constituents.
This medicine should be avoided in patients who have airway disease, lung disease or heart disease.
This medicine should not be used in children who are 2 years old or younger.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Armer Ointment?
Keep this medicine in the packet or the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

My doctor has prescribed Arminol 20mg Tablet even though my blood pressure is within normal limits.
Is it because of the chest pain that I complained of?
Yes, it is possible that your doctor prescribed Arminol 20mg Tablet for chest pain (angina).
Arminol 20mg Tablet is a beta-blocker that is used to lower high blood pressure, prevent angina, treat or prevent heart attacks or reduce your risk of heart problems following a heart attack.
Arminol 20mg Tablet is also used to treat irregularities in the heartbeat, including those caused by anxiety, essential tremor (shaking of the head, chin and hands).
It also prevents migraine headaches, overactive thyroid (thyrotoxicosis and hyperthyroidism), and bleeding in the food pipe caused by high blood pressure.
When can I expect relief in my symptoms after starting Arminol 20mg Tablet for high blood pressure?
Arminol 20mg Tablet usually starts working within a few hours of taking it.
However, it may take up to a week to see the full benefits of the symptoms of high blood pressure or heart conditions.
You may not notice any difference, but that does not mean it is not working.
However, keep taking this medicine as prescribed by your doctor because you will still be getting its full benefits.
Can Arminol 20mg Tablet be used in asthmatics?
No, Arminol 20mg Tablet cannot be used in asthmatics.
This is because using Arminol 20mg Tablet in asthma patients can cause breathing problems, which may trigger an asthma attack.
Always inform your doctor if you have or ever had asthma or any episodes of difficulty breathing, before starting treatment with Arminol 20mg Tablet.
What if I take an overdose of Arminol 20mg Tablet?
If you take an overdose of Arminol 20mg Tablet you may experience symptoms such as slow heartbeat, trembling, difficulty breathing, or dizziness.
However, the response of taking too much of Arminol 20mg Tablet varies from person to person.
It would be best to consult a doctor if you think you have taken more than what you are prescribed.
Can I stop taking Arminol 20mg Tablet as my chest pain is under control?
No, you should not stop taking Arminol 20mg Tablet suddenly because that may worsen your angina or may cause a heart attack.
Tell your doctor and if there is a need to stop Arminol 20mg Tablet, your doctor will reduce your dose gradually over a period of a few weeks.
=

Armodafinil is effective if taken as per the dose and duration prescribed by a doctor
Armodafinil is available in the form of a tablet which is to be taken orally
Is armodafinil a narcotic/is it addictive?
It has very low potential to be a habit forming medicine.
Please follow your doctor's instructions about the dose and duration of treatment.
Do not take it for longer time than prescribed.
=

Can Armril Injection IP be given or injected into muscles?
No, Armril Injection IP should not be administered by injection into the muscles.
It should be given strictly through slow injection into the veins to prevent side effects.
Every medicine has its own side effects and these side effects are unlikely to happen if taken as directed.
Usually, the benefits of the medicine are greater than the risk of side effects.
Armril Injection IP can rarely cause serious side-effects which can be dangerous, like anaphylaxis (red and lumpy skin rash, difficulty breathing, swelling of face, mouth, lips or eyelids), clot in another part of the body or eye problems.
Do consult your doctor before you start this medication and follow the instructions strictly as given.
Can Armril Injection IP cause DVT?
Yes, Armril Injection IP promotes blood clotting, thereby preventing blood loss.
However, in rare cases, this can lead to a chance of developing a clot in the deep leg veins, a condition known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Although many research studies have shown that the increased risk of clot can be due to some other additional factors rather than Armril Injection IP itself.
This condition has been found to be more common in female patients taking Armril Injection IP.
Do consult your doctor before you start this medication and follow the instructions strictly as given.
Can Armril Injection IP affect the colour vision of eyes?
Yes, there are chances of possible disturbances in your colour vision when you are on long term treatment with Armril Injection IP.
Hence, regular eye check should be done during treatment and doctor should be informed if you notice any change in your vision.
If any changes are seen your doctor may stop the medicine and suggest an alternative.
Can Armril Injection IP cause pulmonary embolism?
Armril Injection IP promotes blood clotting and can rarely cause blood clot to travel to the lungs (pulmonary embolism) which can turn fatal sometimes.
Pulmonary embolism is not a common side effect in patients taking Armril Injection IP but can occur in overdosing, patients with long bedrest or prone individuals.
Evidence suggests that the increased risk of clot can be due to some other additional risk factors as well.
Can you take Armril Injection IP on an empty stomach?
Armril Injection IP can be taken with or without food with a glass of water.
The medicine should be swallowed as a whole and should not be crushed or chewed.
Can I take Armril Injection IP for more than 5 days?
The dose and duration of this medicine is decided by the type of disease for which it is prescribed.
For heavy bleeding during monthly menstruation, it is usually taken for up to 5 days.
For other conditions it can be prescribed for less than 5 days and even more that 5 days which is decided by the prescribing physician.
Does Armril Injection IP affect fertility?
No, Armril Injection IP does not affect fertility.
It is taken for heavy menstrual bleeding and evidence suggests no interference of this medicine with ovulation (release of eggs from the ovaries).
Therefore, this medicine is not a type of contraceptive medicine and it will not affect your chances of becoming pregnant.
Can Armril Injection IP be taken for nose bleeding?
Yes, Armril Injection IP can be used for nose bleeding.
It helps to clot the blood and prevent bleeding.
If the bleeding is frequently observed then the medicine can be even taken for a week.
=

Arnac MR Tablet is a combination of three medicines: Aceclofenac, Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone.
This medicine helps in relieving muscle pain by relaxing the affected muscles.
It relieves pain caused due to muscle spasm, cramp or injury.
It also lowers certain chemical substances in the body that cause pain.
What can I do along with Arnac MR Tablet to reduce muscle pain?
If you are suffering from muscle pain due to muscle injury or overuse, you should take rest.
Taking rest will help you avoid any further injury and help you recover efficiently.
Make sure that you take plenty of sleep and try to reduce stress.
Applying ice pack to the affected area may help in relieving pain and inflammation.
If your muscle pain is due to some other disease, follow the advice of your doctor.
Can I get addicted to Arnac MR Tablet?
No, there are no reports of any patient getting addicted to Arnac MR Tablet.
Can I stop taking Arnac MR Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arnac MR Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when your pain is relieved.
However, Arnac MR Tablet should be continued if you are advised by your doctor to do so.
Can the use of Arnac MR Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arnac MR Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Can the use of Arnac MR Tablet cause damage to liver?
Arnac MR Tablet contains Paracetamol and Chlorzoxazone, both these medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially when taken in doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal live enzymes.
How long will Arnac MR Tablet take to act?
=

What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arnet Plus Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it at as mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take a higher than the recommended dose of this medicine?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose of Arnet Plus Tablet can cause increased side effects.
If you are experiencing increased severity of nausea or vomiting, which is not relieved by the recommended doses, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Arnet Plus Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, one of the common side effects of Arnet Plus Tablet is drowsiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention.
Do not drink alcohol or take any medicines that may depress the central nervous system like cough and cold medicines, certain pain medicines, and medicines that help you sleep, while you are taking Arnet Plus Tablet.
Severe drowsiness can happen or it can become worse and cause falls or accidents.
Can the use of Arnet Plus Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Arnet Plus Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
Try to avoid foods that are acidic (like lemons), spicy and salty.
Can a pregnant woman take Arnet Plus Tablet?
Yes, it is safe to take Arnet Plus Tablet in pregnant women.
In fact, this medicine is used to treat nausea and vomiting in pregnant women.
It is mainly recommended to those women whose symptoms have not improved after changing their diet or using other non-medicine treatments.
=

What is Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
Is Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet helpful in relieving stomach pain?
No, Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet preferably should not be taken for stomach pain without consulting a physician.
This drug can increase stomach acid secretion which may aggravate an unknown underlying condition.
Can the use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical messenger called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body which leads to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Is it safe to take a higher dose of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet than recommended?
No, taking higher than the recommended dose of Arnic P 100mg/325mg Tablet can lead to increased chances of side effects like nausea, vomiting, heartburn, indigestion, diarrhea and can also damage your kidneys on long-term use.
If you are experiencing increased severity of pain or if the pain is not relieved by the recommended doses of this medicine, please consult your doctor for re-evaluation.
=

Who should avoid taking Arnx 200 Tablet?
Patients who are allergic to any of its components should avoid Arnx 200 Tablet.
Also, those who are allergic to the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs should avoid using this medicine.
It should not be used along with other antihypertensive medicines like ACE inhibitors or ARBs.
Do not take it for at least 36 hours before or after you take an ACE inhibitor medicine.
If you are not sure, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before taking Arnx 200 Tablet?
Tell your doctor about all of your medical conditions, including liver or kidney disease, history of facial swelling (angioedema).
Inform him if you are pregnant or are breastfeeding.
Also, let your doctor know about all medicines you are taking, especially potassium supplements or its medicine salt, painkillers, blood pressure or heart failure medicines (such as ACE inhibitor, ARBs or Aliskiren).
Can I use Arnx 200 Tablet in pregnancy?
No, Arnx 200 Tablet should be avoided in pregnancy.
Its use can cause injury or even endanger the life of the baby.
If you become pregnant while using Arnx 200 Tablet, stop using it and contact your doctor immediately.
How would I know if I have high potassium levels?
Your doctor will check your blood potassium levels periodically to detect high potassium levels (hyperkalemia).
=

What is Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Aceclofenac and Paracetamol.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause some unwanted common side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn, diarrhea and other uncommon and rare side effects.
Can I stop taking Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
If you are using the medication for a condition associated with long-term pain then Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued for as long as advised by your physician.
It can be discontinued if you are using it for short-term pain relief.
Can the use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
In case of vomiting drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicine without speaking to your doctor.
Can the use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
It should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Arocan P 100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing the underlying painful condition.
=

Can the use of Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection cause allergic reaction?
Yes, Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection can cause an allergic reaction and is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to a group of antibiotic called cephalosporins.
Seek emergency medical help if you have any sign of an allergic reaction like hives; difficulty in breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.
Can the use of Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If you are experiencing severe diarrhea, talk to your doctor about it.
How long does Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection takes to work?
Usually, Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection starts working soon after taking it.
However, it may take some days to kill all the harmful bacteria and make you feel better.
What if I don't get better after using Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arocef Plus 500mg/250mg Injection and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Diclofenac and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet?
Yes, Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet?
The use of Arodase-D 50mg/10mg Tablet is considered to be harmful in patients with known allergy to any of the components or excipients of this medicine or in patients with known allergy to other painkillers (NSAIDs).
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
=

Is the hair growth by Arodil Lotion treatment permanent?
You have to continue applying Arodil Lotion for continued hair growth.
If you stop using Arodil Lotion, the regrown hair may disappear after 3-4 months and balding or hair loss may restart.
How long does it take to see results with Arodil Lotion?
Since hair growth is a slow process, it may take some time before you see new hair growth after starting the treatment with Arodil Lotion.
You need to use Arodil Lotion for 4 months to see its effects.
Do I need to wash my hair every day when using Arodil Lotion?
No, it is not required to shampoo your hair every day before applying Arodil Lotion.
However, if you shampoo your hair, make sure your scalp is dry before using Arodil Lotion.
How often should Arodil Lotion be applied?
The general recommendation is that Arodil Lotion should be used twice daily.
Follow your doctor's instructions and take it in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Can Arodil Lotion be used for beard growth?
No, Arodil Lotion should not be used for beard growth.
It is indicated only for growth of hair on scalp in patients with a family history of hair loss.
=

What is Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Diclofenac and Serratiopeptidase.
This medication helps in relieving pain and inflammation.
It works by lowering the levels of chemical substances in the body that cause pain and inflammation.
Is it safe to use Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet?
Yes, Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet is safe for most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common unwanted side effects like nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, heartburn and diarrhea.
Inform your doctor as soon as possible if you experience any persistent problem due to the medication.
Can I stop taking Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet when my pain is relieved?
Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet should be continued if your physician has advised you to do so.
Can the use of Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet cause nausea and vomiting?
Yes, the use of Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet can cause nausea and vomiting.
Taking it with milk, food or with antacids can prevent nausea.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medicine.
In case of vomiting, drink plenty of water or other fluids by taking small frequent sips.
Talk to your doctor if vomiting persists and you notice signs of dehydration, like dark colored and strong-smelling urine and a low frequency of urination.
Do not take any other medicines without speaking to a doctor.
Can the use of Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arofen S 50 mg/10 mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
=

What if I give too much of Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup by mistake?
An extra dose of Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup is unlikely to do harm.
However, if you think you have given too much of Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup to your child, immediately speak to a doctor.
Overdose may cause unwanted side effects and may even worsen your child’s condition.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup?
Some serious side effects of this medicine include persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup?
Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
Which lab tests may my child undergo while taking Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup on a long-term basis?
The doctor may prescribe getting kidney function tests and liver function tests periodically to keep a check on your child’s condition.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
Yellow or green mucus in the nose does not mean that antibiotics are needed.
During a common cold, it is normal for mucus to thicken up and change from clear to yellow or green.
Symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
Does a common cold caused by viruses always result in a secondary bacterial infection? When to start an antibiotic to prevent infection?
In most cases, bacterial infections do not follow viral infections.
Using antibiotics to treat viral infections may instead lead to side effects without benefiting your child's health.
Use antibiotics only after consulting with your child’s doctor.
Can Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup impact my child’s digestive system?
Children often have a sensitive stomach and develop a stomach upset while taking antibiotics.
When antibiotics are given, the good bacteria in their gastrointestinal tract may take a hit too.
Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup may kill off the good bacteria along with the bad, increasing the risk of developing other infections.
In case your child is having diarrhea while on Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup, do not stop the medicine course.
Instead, call your child’s doctor to ask about the next steps.
In some cases, the doctor may alter the dose.
Can Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup lead to bacterial resistance in my child?
Yes, irregular treatment, repeated use,, and misuse of Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup can lead to resistance.
Resistant bacteria are no longer killed by the antibiotics and may lead to reinfection.
How long should I take Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup?
Arofix 50mg Dry Syrup is usually prescribed for 7-14 days.
You should take it for the full duration of your treatment as advised by your doctor.
=

Why is Arogene O Syrup prescribed?
Arogene O Syrup is prescribed for the treatment of acidity, heartburn and stomach ulcers.
How should I take Arogene O Syrup?
Take Arogene O Syrup on an empty stomach, at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
Can I drink water after taking Arogene O Syrup?
Avoid drinking anything immediately after taking Arogene O Syrup as that can reduce the effectiveness of this medicine.
Can the use of Arogene O Syrup cause constipation?
Yes, Arogene O Syrup contains Sucralfate, which can cause constipation.
To prevent constipation, eat high-fiber foods like vegetables, fruits and cereals.
Exercise regularly by engaging in activities like swimming, jogging or take a short walk.
Talk to your doctor about treating constipation if it persists for a long time.
Can I stop taking Arogene O Syrup when my symptoms are relieved?
No, take Arogene O Syrup for the full prescribed length of time even if you feel better.
Do not stop taking this medication without consulting your doctor.
=

Can I give Aroint Dry Syrup to my child repeatedly for a long time?
Giving your child Aroint Dry Syrup for a long term can cause fungal infection (oral thrush) in the mouth and severe gastrointestinal infections (superinfections).
Therefore, do not alter the dose and duration on your own and give Aroint Dry Syrup to your child exactly as prescribed.
Additionally, irregular treatment, repeated use, and misuse of Aroint Dry Syrup can make the bacteria resistant.
Are there any possible serious side effects of Aroint Dry Syrup?
Although rare, Aroint Dry Syrup may cause some serious side effects such as persistent vomiting, kidney damage, allergy, diarrhea, and severe gastrointestinal infections.
Always consult your child’s doctor for help in such a situation.
Can other medicines be given at the same time as Aroint Dry Syrup?
Aroint Dry Syrup can sometimes interact with other medicines or substances.
Tell your doctor about any other medicines your child is taking before starting Aroint Dry Syrup.
Also, check with your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
Can I get my child vaccinated while on treatment with Aroint Dry Syrup?
Antibiotics usually do not interfere with the ingredients in vaccines or cause a bad reaction in a child who has just been vaccinated.
However, children taking antibiotics should not get vaccinated until they recover from the illness.
As soon as your child feels better, the vaccine can be given.
The mucus coming out of my child’s nose is yellow-green.
Is it a sign of a bacterial infection?
In the common cold, the mucus changes its color and thickens up with time, but this does not mean that your child needs antibiotics.
Common cold symptoms often last for 7-10 days.
In case they fail to clear up within this duration, reach out to your child’s doctor for guidance.
Is Aroint Dry Syrup safe for children suffering from infectious mononucleosis?
No, do not give this medicine to your child in this case as a high percentage of children with infectious mononucleosis develop a skin rash (erythematous rash) while taking Aroint Dry Syrup.
=

My child has a persistent cough along with allergic symptoms.
Can I give cough and allergy medicine together?
Do not mix cough and allergy medicines because they usually both contain similar ingredients.
This may result in double dosing of the active ingredients, thereby causing serious side effects.
Can I decrease the dose of Arokast L Syrup by myself if my child starts to feel better?
No, adhere to the dose as prescribed by your child’s doctor.
Do not increase or decrease the dose by yourself as it can impact your child’s health.
While increasing the dose may cause unwanted effects like sedation and depression, decreasing the dose or stopping it suddenly can result in rebound reversal of all symptoms.
How should Arokast L Syrup be stored?
Arokast L Syrup should be stored at room temperature in a dry place, away from direct heat and light.
Also, keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children to avoid any accidental intake.
Can Arokast L Syrup make my child sleepy?
Arokast L Syrup causes mild drowsiness which can make your child sleepy.
However, never give this medicine to your child to induce sleep.
Forced sleep could mask any underlying sleep disorder like insomnia.
My child is an athlete and has to participate in a sports event in the next two days.
Can I start the course of Arokast L Syrup?
No, don’t start Arokast L Syrup without speaking to your child’s doctor.
Moreover, Arokast L Syrup can hamper your child’s performance as it may cause mild sedation, dizziness, and sleepiness.
So, it’s best to reach out to the doctor first.
Can I stop the medicine by myself?
No, all symptoms may reappear on sudden withdrawal of Arokast L Syrup usually if taken for a long-term.
It is advised to stop this medicine gradually under the guidance of your child’s doctor.
My child is suffering from a mood disorder.
Is it safe to give Arokast L Syrup to my child?
Some studies show that Arokast L Syrup can cause mood disorders, hallucinations, depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, shakiness, and trouble controlling body movements.
Therefore, consult your child’s doctor before giving any medicine to your child.
=

Cephalexin is safe if used at prescribed doses for the prescribed duration as advised by your doctor
Can the use of Arolexim 500mg Capsule cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arolexim 500mg Capsule can cause diarrhea.
It is an antibiotic which kills the harmful bacteria.
However, it also affects the helpful bacteria in your stomach or intestine and causes diarrhea.
If diarrhea persists, talk to your doctor about it.
What if Arolexim 500mg Capsule doesn't work?
Talk to your doctor if Arolexim 500mg Capsule doesn't seem to work for you.
Your doctor may increase the dose of Arolexim 500mg Capsule or switch you to an alternate option, which may work for you.
What if I don't get better after using Arolexim 500mg Capsule?
Inform your doctor if you don't feel better after finishing the full course of treatment.
Also, inform him if your symptoms are getting worse while using this medicine.
Can I stop taking Arolexim 500mg Capsule when my symptoms are relieved?
No, do not stop taking Arolexim 500mg Capsule and complete the full course of treatment even if you feel better.
Your symptoms may improve before the infection is completely cured.
=

What organism does Aroma Soap kill?
Aroma Soap is a broad-spectrum antiseptic, effective against Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi.
Aroma Soap is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Use it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
Is Aroma Soap available over the counter?
No, Aroma Soap is a prescription medicine and is available only if prescribed by a doctor.
It is not available over the counter.
No, Aroma Soap us an antiseptic and disinfectant.
It is active against a wide range of bacteria, viruses, yeasts and fungi.
Aroma Soap is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop using it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Aroma Soap too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
=

Arony Syrup is a combination of three medicines: Ambroxol, Levosalbutamol / Levalbuterol, Guaifenesin.
It is used in the treatment of cough with mucus.
It thins and loosens the mucus (phlegm) which makes it easier to cough out.
Levosalbutamol is a bronchodilator and it works by relaxing the muscles of the airways and widens the airways.
It works by decreasing the stickiness of the mucus (phlegm) and helps to remove it easily from the airways.
Is it safe to use Arony Syrup?
Yes, it is safe to use Arony Syrup in most of the patients.
However, in some patients it may cause common side effects like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach pain, allergic reaction, dizziness, headache, rash, urticaria, tremor, palpitations, muscle cramp and increased heart rate.
Inform your doctor if you experience any persistent problem while taking this medicine.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arony Syrup?
Use of Arony Syrup is considered to be harmful in patients with a history of allergy to any of the active or inactive ingredients.
Levosalbutamol and beta-blockers like propranolol should not usually be taken together.
Can the use of Arony Syrup cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Arony Syrup can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for sometime and resume once you feel better.
Do not drive or use any machines.
Can the use of Arony Syrup cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arony Syrup can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting your doctor.
What are the recommended storage conditions for Arony Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Does birth control pills have any effect on Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet?
If you are taking birth control pills, dose of Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet need to be reduced as birth control pills may interfere with clearance of Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet, increasing its levels and chances of side effects.
How should Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet be taken?
Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet should be taken strictly as advised by the doctor.
To avoid an upset stomach it should be taken with food.
Is it okay to take furosemide along with Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet?
One should take proper caution if you are taking furosemide along with Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet.
This is because the combined use of these medicines may decrease the levels of potassium.
Hence, regular monitoring of potassium levels is required.
When should Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet be avoided?
Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet should be avoided in patients who are allergic to ambroxol, Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet, or theophylline.
Along with that, patients suffering from low blood pressure, irregular heart beats or rhythm or history of heart attack, liver disease or kidney disorder should avoid taking Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet.
Is Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet the same as theophylline?
Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet comprises of theophylline-7 acetate and ambroxol which makes it effective in making the mucus more fluid and clearing the airways easily, thereby making breathing easier.
This effect of Arophyll-SR 200 Tablet works as an added advantage over theophylline.
Moreover, it also reduces the need for other medicine used to treat asthma, like salbutamol.
=

What is Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is a combination of two medicines: Domperidone and Rabeprazole.
This combination is used to treat acidity and heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); a condition where the acid in the stomach flows back up into the food pipe (esophagus).
It is also used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers.
Domperidone helps to control vomiting by increasing the movement of the gut, allowing the food to move more easily through the stomach.
What are the contraindications of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
The use of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR is considered to be harmful for patients with a known hypersensitivity to rabeprazole or domperidone or any other inactive ingredients of the medicine.
Caution is advised in patients with underlying kidney or liver disease.
Can the use of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause dry mouth.
Dryness of mouth occurs due to Domperidone.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Keep some water on your bedside at night.
Cut down the intake of alcohol and avoid smoking.
If you have dry mouth, try to use alcohol-free mouthwash as its use can increase the risk of tooth decay.
Can the use of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR can cause diarrhea.
In case you experience diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Avoid taking fatty or fried foods along with this medication.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists and if you notice any signs of dehydration, like less urination with dark colored and strong-smelling urine.
What is the recommended storage condition for Arorab HD 30mg/40mg Capsule SR?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

What is Aroside Forte 180mg/96mg/200mg Tablet used for?
This is a combination of three medicines: Bromelain, Trypsin and Rutoside.
Bromelain and Trypsin are enzymes which increase blood supply in the affected area and help the body produce substances that fight pain and swelling.
Rutoside is an antioxidant which protects the body from any damage caused by chemicals (free radicals) and further reduces swelling.
No, Trypsin is not a hormone.
It is an enzyme, a protein and an endopeptidase.
What is the recommended storage condition for Aroside Forte 180mg/96mg/200mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

What is Arotex 10mg Syrup? What is it used for?
Arotex 10mg Syrup belongs to a group of medicines called antihistamines, which means it is an anti-allergy medicine.
It is used to treat various allergic skin conditions (e.g., eczema, dermatitis, allergies, rash).
Arotex 10mg Syrup effectively reduces symptoms such as swelling, itching and redness associated with such conditions.
It also helps relieve excessive anxiety or worry in people who are supposed to undergo a surgery or have recently undergone a surgery.
It calms the brain and makes such people feel better.
Arotex 10mg Syrup is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How does Arotex 10mg Syrup work for allergies?
Arotex 10mg Syrup works by decreasing the inflammation caused by allergies.
It reduces inflammation by blocking the release of a natural chemical in our body, called histamine, that causes allergic symptoms such as swelling, redness and pain.
What if I forget to take a dose of Arotex 10mg Syrup?
If you forget a dose of Arotex 10mg Syrup, take it as soon as you remember.
However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next scheduled dose in the prescribed time.
Do not double the dose to make up for the missed one as this may increase the chances of developing side effects.
Arotex 10mg Syrup is effective if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Do not stop taking it even if you see improvement in your condition.
If you stop using Arotex 10mg Syrup too early, the symptoms may return or worsen.
Can I stop taking Arotex 10mg Syrup when I feel better?
No, do not stop taking Arotex 10mg Syrup without consulting your doctor even if you are feeling better.
Your symptoms may improve before the condition is completely cured.
Therefore, for better and complete treatment, it is advised to continue your treatment for the prescribed duration.
=

After how many days of taking Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet will I start feeling better?
You may start to see an improvement in your symptoms after 1-2 weeks of starting the treatment.
In case you do not see any improvement, do not stop the medicine and consult your doctor.
It may take around 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of the medicine.
I feel that my symptoms have worsened after having started taking Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet.
Can I stop it on my own or do I need to consult the doctor?
No, do not stop taking Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet abruptly, without consulting your doctor.
This is a common problem with Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet that initially you may feel that your symptoms have worsened but the benefits start appearing after 1-2 weeks.
If the worsening does not improve even after 1-2 weeks, you must consult your doctor.
Can Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet affect my sex life?
Yes, Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet use may affect your sex life.
It can cause decreased sexual desire and inability to reach orgasm in both men and women.
Additionally, men may even experience abnormal erection and ejaculation.
What is the effect of Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet on children?
Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet should not be used in children under 18 years of age.
The reason being, patients under 18 have an increased risk of experiencing side effects such as suicidal thoughts, aggression, oppositional behavior and anger when they take Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet.
If your doctor has prescribed Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet for your child and you are worried about these side effects, discuss it with your doctor.
I have been taking tamoxifen for breast cancer.
Can I take Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet with it?
No, you should not take Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet if you are receiving tamoxifen.
Tamoxifen often causes hot flashes (episodes of feeling extremely hot), which can be treated with Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet.
But Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet may reduce the effectiveness of tamoxifen and can lead to recurrence of breast cancer.
Do I need to be careful while taking Arotine CR 37.5 Tablet if I am a diabetic?
=

How quickly does Arovom 4mg Tablet MD work?
Arovom 4mg Tablet MD starts working within half an hour to 2 hours.
It dissolves rapidly into the bloodstream and starts showing its effect.
What are the side effects of Arovom 4mg Tablet MD?
The most common side effects of Arovom 4mg Tablet MD are constipation, diarrhea, fatigue and headache.
However, these are usually not bothersome and resolve on their own after some time.
Consult your doctor if these persist or worry you.
When should you take Arovom 4mg Tablet MD?
Arovom 4mg Tablet MD should be taken with a full glass of water, with or without food.
It should be used exactly as per the dose and duration advised by the doctor.
Usually, the first dose of Arovom 4mg Tablet MD is taken before the start of your surgery, chemotherapy or radiation treatment.
Is Arovom 4mg Tablet MD a steroid?
No, Arovom 4mg Tablet MD is an antiemetic and not a steroid.
Arovom 4mg Tablet MD is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
It is prescribed for the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting which is commonly observed after surgery or due to cancer chemotherapy.
Does Arovom 4mg Tablet MD work for seasickness?
No, Arovom 4mg Tablet MD does not work for seasickness.
This is because Arovom 4mg Tablet MD has very little effect on the nausea associated with motion sickness.
=

Can the use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause dizziness?
Yes, the use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet can cause dizziness (feeling faint, weak, unsteady or lightheaded) in some patients.
If you feel dizzy or lightheaded, it is better to rest for some time and resume once you feel better.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers (NSAIDs) or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or active, recurrent stomach ulcer / bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can the use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Aroxib P 60mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with the underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
=

What are the instructions for the storage and disposal of Aroxyl Syrup?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
Can I take Aroxyl Syrup along with other medicines?
Inform your doctor about the medicines you might be taking before using Aroxyl Syrup.
Let your doctor know if you have any other medical condition.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Aroxyl Syrup be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having some serious side effects and toxicity.
=

What is Arpan 40mg Tablet used for?
Arpan 40mg Tablet is used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, reflux esophagitis or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Arpan 40mg Tablet prevents acidity associated with use of painkillers.
It is also used to treat a disease associated with excessive acid production in the stomach known as Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES).
It works by reducing the amount of acid made by your stomach and thus relieves your symptoms.
How long does it take for Arpan 40mg Tablet to work?
You should start to feel better within 2 to 3 days.
It may take up to 4 weeks for Arpan 40mg Tablet to work properly so you may still have some symptoms during this time.
Is a single dose of Arpan 40mg Tablet sufficient?
No, a single dose may not be sufficient.
However, with only a few doses of Arpan 40mg Tablet you may get relief with the symptoms.
Arpan 40mg Tablet is usually needed only for a short term or upto 2 weeks for heartburn, indigestion, acid reflux.
However, if need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease and Zollinger Ellison syndrome (ZES), Arpan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long term duration as well.
Please consult your doctor if you do not feel better even after taking Arpan 40mg Tablet regularly for 2 weeks as prescribed.
Yes, Arpan 40mg Tablet is relatively safe.
Most of the people who take Arpan 40mg Tablet do not get a side effect.
It is advised to be taken as directed by the doctor for maximum benefits.
Can I take Arpan 40mg Tablet for a long term?
Arpan 40mg Tablet is usually prescribed for short-term use only.
However, if the need arises, such as for treating peptic ulcer disease, ZE syndrome, etc.
Arpan 40mg Tablet may be prescribed for a long-term duration as well.
Long-term use may carry an increased risk for side effects and must be discussed with the doctor.
Please use Arpan 40mg Tablet as advised by your doctor and under their supervision.
What are the long term side effects of Arpan 40mg Tablet?
=

Is Arpidon 5mg Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arpidon 5mg Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arpidon 5mg Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arpidon 5mg Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arpidon 5mg Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arpidon 5mg Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arpidon 5mg Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arpidon 5mg Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arpidon 5mg Tablet?
Arpidon 5mg Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arpidon 5mg Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arpidon 5mg Tablet?
Arpidon 5mg Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
=

Is Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule a steroid?
No, Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule is not a steroid.
It belongs to a group of medicines known as immunosuppressive agents.
It decreases the action of the body’s immune system.
Can Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule cause weight gain?
Yes, Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule may cause weight gain.
However, the changes in weight are uncommon side effects of this medicine.
Consult your doctor if these side effects worry you.
Does Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule cause hair growth?
Yes, the use of Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule may cause abnormal hair growth (hypertrichosis) as a common side effect of Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule, though it does not affect everyone.
Does Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule cause fatigue?
Yes, Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule may cause fatigue as a common side effect.
However, fatigue could also be due to an underlying disease.
Discuss with your doctor if this side effect worries you.
Do I need to get any tests done while being treated with Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule?
Yes, the doctor may suggest tests to check the levels of Arpimune-O 50mg Capsule in your blood, especially if you have had a transplant.
You may also be advised to get your blood pressure checked before the start of your treatment and regularly during treatment.
In addition, liver and kidney function tests along with your blood lipids (fats), will be checked.
=

Is Arpit 10 Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arpit 10 Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arpit 10 Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arpit 10 Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arpit 10 Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arpit 10 Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arpit 10 Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arpit 10 Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arpit 10 Tablet?
Arpit 10 Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arpit 10 Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arpit 10 Tablet?
Arpit 10 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arpit 10 Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Is Arpizol 15 Tablet a mood stabilizer?
Arpizol 15 Tablet is effective in treating manic episodes and other mood symptoms of bipolar disorder but not for the depressive episodes.
Therefore, it can be combined with mood stabilizers like valproate to treat bipolar disorders.
How long does Arpizol 15 Tablet take to work?
The benefit of Arpizol 15 Tablet may appear after a few days or few weeks of starting Arpizol 15 Tablet.
It may take 4-6 weeks to see the full benefits of this medicine.
Does Arpizol 15 Tablet affect you sexually?
Yes, Arpizol 15 Tablet may cause prolonged and painful erection (priapism) in some patients.
It may also cause impulse control disorder wherein the patient may develop urges or cravings that are irresistible and unusual for that person.
In this case, the patient may develop an abnormally high sex drive or may experience an increase in sexual thoughts or feelings.
Consult your doctor who may modify your dose or may advise to stop Arpizol 15 Tablet.
What is the most important thing that I should know about Arpizol 15 Tablet?
Arpizol 15 Tablet is not approved in elderly patients with dementia as it may increase the risk of causing death.
Dementia is a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities.
This may further cause changes in mood and personality.
Furthermore, patients with depression should be closely monitored when being given Arpizol 15 Tablet, as they can develop suicidal tendencies.
What should I avoid while using Arpizol 15 Tablet?
Arpizol 15 Tablet may commonly cause sleepiness, sedation, dizziness, blurred vision, and double vision.
Avoid driving and using heavy machinery if you experience these symptoms.
You should also avoid over-exercise, over-exposure to heat or getting dehydrated by avoiding direct sunlight.
It is recommended to stay indoors in hot weather, and drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration.
Can Arpizol 15 Tablet be taken by diabetics?
=

Arpzin M Tablet is a combination of two medicines: Montelukast and Levocetirizine.
Levocetirizine is an antiallergic which helps to relieve allergy symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, watery eyes and cough.
It works by lowering chemicals in the body that cause allergy symptoms.
Montelukast works by blocking another chemical messenger (leukotriene) and reduces inflammation (swelling) in the airways and nose.
This further helps to relieve the symptoms.
Can the use of Arpzin M Tablet cause drowsiness or sleepiness?
Yes, the most common side effect of Arpzin M Tablet is sleepiness.
Do not drive, operate heavy machinery or engage in other activities that need your full attention unless your doctor says that you may do so.
Do not drink alcohol or take other central nervous system depressants, such as cough and cold medicines.
Also avoid taking certain pain relief medicines and medicines that help you sleep as they can lead to severe drowsiness or can worsen it, causing falls or accidents.
Can Arpzin M Tablet be stopped when allergy symptoms are relieved?
No, Arpzin M Tablet should be continued as advised by the doctor.
If you experience any side effects of this medicine or the symptoms of allergy are worsened, consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Arpzin M Tablet cause dry mouth?
Yes, the use of Arpzin M Tablet can cause dry mouth.
If you experience dry mouth, drink plenty of water.
Take regular sips during the day and keep some water by your bed at night.
You may use lip balm if your lips are also dry.
Can I drink alcohol while taking Arpzin M Tablet?
No, do not take alcohol while taking Arpzin M Tablet.
Drinking alcohol will increase the severity of drowsiness/sleepiness caused by Arpzin M Tablet.
=

Can the use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be stopped when my pain is relieved?
Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is usually used for short term and can be discontinued when the pain is relieved.
However, Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet should be continued if advised by the doctor.
Are there any specific contraindications associated with the use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
The use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet is considered to be harmful for patients with known allergy to painkillers or any of the components or excipients of this medicine.
The use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with a history of stomach ulcers or in patients with active, recurrent stomach ulcer/bleeding.
It should also be avoided in patients with a history of heart failure, high blood pressure, and liver or kidney disease.
Can Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be taken with vitamin B-complex?
Yes, Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can be taken with vitamin B-complex preparations.
While Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet helps to relieve pain, vitamin B-complex can help to correct the vitamin deficiency that might be causing your symptoms.
Can the use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to kidneys?
Yes, the long-term use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet can cause damage to the kidneys.
Normal kidneys produce a chemical called prostaglandins that protects them from damage.
Use of painkillers lowers the levels of prostaglandins in the body leading to kidney damage on long-term use.
Use of painkillers is not recommended to patients with underlying kidney disease.
Will Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet be more effective if taken in higher doses?
No, taking more of this medicine will not make it more effective, rather it can lead to increased side effects.
If the symptoms are getting severe, please consult the doctor for re-evaluation.
Can the use of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet cause damage to liver?
Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet contains Paracetamol.
These medicines are known to cause harm to the liver especially in the doses above the recommended level.
Also, avoid drinking alcohol while taking this medicine, as it may further increase your risk of liver damage.
Use of this medicine should preferably be avoided in patients with underlying liver disease.
Contact your doctor immediately if you notice any early signs and symptoms of liver damage.
These symptoms may include fever, rash, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, stomach pain, dark urine, yellow skin or eyes and abnormal liver enzymes.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arrestin PT 4mg/100mg/325mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container or the pack it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
Make sure it is not consumed by pets, children and other people.
=

Who should not use Arsate 60mg Injection?
Use of Arsate 60mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Arsate 60mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Arsate 60mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Arsate 60mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Arsate 60mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like a kidney- or heart-related problem.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Arsate 60mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Arsate 60mg Injection administered?
Arsate 60mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

What if I vomit after taking Arshmol 650mg Tablet?
If you vomit in less than 30 minutes after having a dose of Arshmol 650mg Tablet tablets or syrup, retake the same dose again.
If you vomit after 30 minutes of a dose, you do not need to take another one until the next standard dose.
When will I feel better after taking the Arshmol 650mg Tablet?
Usually, you will start feeling better after about half an hour of taking a Arshmol 650mg Tablet.
How often can I take the Arshmol 650mg Tablet?
You should only take four doses of Arshmol 650mg Tablet in 24 hours.
There should be a gap of at least 4 hours between two doses.
Do not take Arshmol 650mg Tablet for more than 3 days without consulting a doctor first.
Does Arshmol 650mg Tablet make babies sleepy?
No, Arshmol 650mg Tablet does not make babies sleepy.
It is a pain-relieving medicine that is also used to control high fever.
Is Arshmol 650mg Tablet safe for children?
Arshmol 650mg Tablet is considered safe for children only when used as directed by the doctor.
=

What should I know about high cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a type of fat present in your blood.
Total cholesterol is determined by the total amount of LDL and HDL cholesterol in the body.
LDL cholesterol is called “bad” cholesterol.
Bad cholesterol can build up in the wall of your blood vessels and slow or obstruct blood flow to your heart, brain, and other organs.
This can cause heart disease and stroke.
HDL cholesterol is called “good” cholesterol as it prevents the bad cholesterol from building up in the blood vessels.
High levels of triglycerides are also harmful to you.
Can Arstatin 10mg Tablet cause muscle problems or muscle injury?
Yes, taking Arstatin 10mg Tablet can cause muscle problems or muscle injury.
This is because of the reduced oxygen supply to the muscle cells which leads to fatigue, muscle pain, tenderness, or muscle weakness.
The soreness may be significant enough to interfere with your daily activities.
Do not take it lightly and consult your doctor to know about ways to prevent this and to avoid making it worse.
Is Arstatin 10mg Tablet used for lowering cholesterol?
Arstatin 10mg Tablet belongs to a group of medicines known as statins, which lowers the level of lipids or fats.
Arstatin 10mg Tablet is used to lower lipids known as cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood when a low-fat diet and lifestyle changes fail to lower the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides.
If you are at an increased risk of heart disease, Arstatin 10mg Tablet can also be used to reduce such risk even if your cholesterol levels are normal.
You should maintain a standard cholesterol-lowering diet during treatment.
Can Arstatin 10mg Tablet be prescribed to children?
Arstatin 10mg Tablet is for adults and children aged 10 years or more whose cholesterol levels do not come down enough with exercise and a low-fat diet.
It is not approved for use in patients younger than 10 years old.
Is Arstatin 10mg Tablet a blood thinner?
No, Arstatin 10mg Tablet is not a blood thinner.
It works by slowing down the production of cholesterol in the body.
This further decreases the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the part of the body.
By lowering the levels of cholesterol and triglycerides it prevents the chances of stroke and heart attack.
Will taking Arstatin 10mg Tablet lead to an increase in my risk of diabetes?
=

Can the use of Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet cause diarrhea?
Yes, the use of Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet can cause diarrhea.
In case of diarrhea, drink plenty of water or other fluids.
Talk to your doctor if diarrhea persists.
Do not take any other medicine without consulting a doctor.
Can I use oral contraceptives while using Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet?
No, do not use oral contraceptives while using Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet.
Use of oral contraceptives along with this medicine increases the chance of serious complications.
Will a higher than the recommended dose of Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet be more effective?
No, taking a higher than the recommended dose may not be more effective, rather it may increase the chances of having serious side effects and toxicity.
If the recommended doses do not relieve your symptoms or there is an increased severity of your symptoms, please consult your doctor.
What are the instructions for storage and disposal of Arsyl T 250mg/250mg Tablet?
Keep this medicine in the container it came in, tightly closed.
Store it according to the instructions mentioned on the pack or label.
=

Is Artacil 50mg Injection an aminosteroid?
Artacil 50mg Injection is not an aminosteroid.
It is a benzylisoquinolines (muscle relaxant)
Why does Artacil 50mg Injection cause hypotension?
Artacil 50mg Injection causes hypotension (low blood pressure) due to release of histamine.
Why does Artacil 50mg Injection cause histamine release?
It acts on blood cells called basophils or mast cells which release histamine.
How long does Artacil 50mg Injection take to work?
=

Who should not use Artbase 150mg Injection?
Use of Artbase 150mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Artbase 150mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Artbase 150mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Artbase 150mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Artbase 150mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health condition like a kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Artbase 150mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Artbase 150mg Injection administered?
Artbase 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

Who should not use Artech 150mg Injection?
Use of Artech 150mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Artech 150mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Artech 150mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Artech 150mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Artech 150mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health condition like a kidney- or heart-related problems.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Artech 150mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Take it exactly as directed and do not skip any dose.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Artech 150mg Injection administered?
Artech 150mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

Who should not use Artedoc 120mg Injection?
Use of Artedoc 120mg Injection should be avoided in patients who are allergic to Artedoc 120mg Injection or any of its components.
However, if you are not aware of any allergy or if you are using Artedoc 120mg Injection for the first time, consult your doctor.
What should I tell my doctor before starting treatment with Artedoc 120mg Injection?
Before starting treatment with Artedoc 120mg Injection, inform your doctor if you have any other health conditions like a kidney- or heart-related problem.
This is because certain medical conditions may affect your treatment and you may even need dose modifications.
Also, let your doctor know about all the other medicines you are taking because they may affect, or be affected by, this medicine.
Inform your doctor if you are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Artedoc 120mg Injection is safe if used in the dose and duration advised by your doctor.
Follow your doctor's instructions carefully and let your doctor know if any of the side effects bother you.
How is Artedoc 120mg Injection administered?
Artedoc 120mg Injection should be administered under the supervision of a trained healthcare professional or a doctor only and should not be self-administered.
The dose will depend on the condition you are being treated for and will be decided by your doctor.
=

